

On marriage and at what age young men and virgins are 
capable of it: and why so much desire it. Also, how long men 
and women are capable of it. 

THERE ARE VERY FEW, except some professional debauchees, 
who will not readily agree that “Marriage is honourable to 
all,” being ordained by Heaven in Paradise; and without 
which no man or woman can be in a capacity, honestly, to 
yield obedience to the first law of the creation, “Increase and 
Multiply.” And since it is natural in young people to desire 
the embraces, proper to the marriage bed, it behoves parents 
to look after their children, and when they find them inclinable 
to marriage, not violently to restrain their inclinations 
(which, instead of allaying them, makes them but the more 
impetuous) but rather provide such suitable matches for 
them, as may make their lives comfortable; lest the crossing 
of those inclinations should precipitate them to commit those 

APPROVED DIRECTIONS FOR NURSES. 


3 



The Works of Aristotle 

follies that may bring an indelible stain upon their families. 
The inclination of maids to marriage may be known by many 
symptoms; for when they arrive at puberty, which is about 
the fourteenth or fifteenth year of their age, then their natural 
purgations begin to flow; and the blood, which is no longer 
to augment their bodies, abounding, stirs up their minds to 
venery. External causes may also incline them to it; for their 
spirits being brisk and inflamed, when they arrive at that 
age, if they eat hard salt things and spices, the body becomes 
more and more heated, whereby the desire to veneral embraces 
is very great, and sometimes almost insuperable. And 
the use of this so much desired enjoyment being denied to 
virgins, many times is followed by dismal consequences; such 
as the green weesel colonet, short-breathing, trembling of 
the heart, etc. But when they are married and their veneral 
desires satisfied by the enjoyment of their husbands, these 
distempers vanish, and they become more gay and lively than 
before. Also, their eager staring at men, and affecting their 
company, shows that nature pushes them upon coition; and 
their parents neglecting to provide them with husbands, they 
break through modesty and satisfy themselves in unlawful 

embraces. It is the same with brisk widows, who cannot be 
satisfied without that benevolence to which they were accustomed 
when they had their husbands. 

At the age of 14, the menses, in virgins, begin to flow; 
then they are capable of conceiving, and continue generally 
until 44, when they cease bearing, unless their bodies are 
strong and healthful, which sometimes enables them to bear 
at 65. But many times the menses proceed from some violence 
done to nature, or some morbific matter, which often 
proves fatal. And, hence, men who are desirous of issue ought 
to marry a woman within the age aforesaid, or blame themselves 
if they meet with disappointment; though, if an old 
man, if not worn out with diseases and incontinency, marry 
a brisk, lively maiden, there is hope of him having children 
to 70 or 80 years. 

Hippocrates says, that a youth of 15, or between that and 
17, having much vital strength, is capable of begetting children; 
and also that the force of the procreating matter increases 
till 45, 50, and 55, and then begins to flag; the seed, 
by degrees, becoming unfruitful, the natural spirits being 
extinguished, and the humours dried up. Thus, in general, 

4 



The Works of Aristotle 

but as to individuals, it often falls out otherwise. Nay, it is 
reported by a credible author, that in Swedland, a man was 
married at 100 years of age to a girl of 30 years, and had 
many children by her; but his countenance was so fresh, that 
those who knew him not, imagined him not to exceed 50. 
And in Campania, where the air is clear and temperate, men 
of 80 marry young virgins, and have children by them; which 
shows that age in them does not hinder procreation, unless 
they be exhausted in their youths and their yards be shrivelled 
up. 

If any would know why a woman is sooner barren than a 
man, they may be assured that the natural heat, which is the 
cause of generation, is more predominant in the man than 
in the woman; for since a woman is more moist than a man, 
as her monthly purgations demonstrate, as also the softness 
of her body; it is also apparent that he does not much exceed 
her in natural heat, which is the chief thing that concocts 
the humours in proper aliment, which the woman wanting 
grows fat; whereas a man, through his native heat, melts his 
fat by degrees and his humours are dissolved; and by the 
benefit thereof are converted into seed. And this may also be 

added, that women, generally, are not so strong as men, nor 
so wise or prudent; nor have so much reason and ingenuity 
in ordering affairs; which shows that thereby the faculties 
are hindered in operations. 

5 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER II 


How to beget a male or female child; and of the Embryo and 
perfect Birth; and the fittest time for the copula. 

WHEN A YOUNG COUPLE are married, they naturally desire 
children; and therefore adopt the means that nature has appointed 
to that end. But notwithstanding their endeavours 
they must know that the success of all depends on the blessing 
of the Gods: not only so, but the sex, whether male or 
female, is from their disposal also, though it cannot be denied, 
that secondary causes have influence therein, especially 
two. First, the general humour, which is brought by the arteria 
praeparantes to the testes, in form of blood, and there 
elaborated into seed, by the seminifical faculty residing in 
them. Secondly, the desire of coition, which fires the imagination 
with unusual fancies, and by the sight of brisk, charming 
beauty, may soon inflame the appetite. But if nature be 
enfeebled, some meats must be eaten as will conduce to afford 
such aliment as makes the seed abound, and restores 
the exhaustion of nature that the faculties may freely oper


ate, and remove impediments obstructing the procreating of 
children. Then, since diet alters the evil state of the body to 
a better, those subject to barrenness must eat such meats as 
are juicy and nourish well, making the body lively and full 
of sap; of which faculty are all hot moist meats. For, according 
to Galen, seed is made of pure concocted and windy 
superfluity of blood, whence we may conclude, that there is 
a power in many things, to accumulate seed, and also to 
augment it; and other things of force to cause desire, as hen 
eggs, pheasants, woodcocks, gnat-snappers, blackbirds, 
thrushes, young pigeons, sparrows, partridges, capons, almonds, 
pine nuts, raisins, currants, strong wines taken sparingly, 
especially those made of the grapes of Italy. But erection 
is chiefly caused by scuraum, eringoes, cresses, crysmon, 
parsnips, artichokes, turnips, asparagus, candied ginger, 
acorns bruised to powder and drank in muscadel, scallion, 
sea shell fish, etc. But these must have time to perform their 
operation, and must be used for a considerable time, or you 
will reap but little benefit from them. The act of coition 
being over, let the woman repose herself on her right side, 
with her head lying low, and her body declining, that by 

6 



The Works of Aristotle 

sleeping in that posture, the cani, on the right side of the 
matrix, may prove the place of conception; for therein is the 
greatest generative heat, which is the chief procuring cause 
of male children, and rarely fails the expectations of those 
that experience it, especially if they do but keep warm, without 
much motion, leaning to the right, and drinking a little 
spirit of saffron and juice of hissop in a glass of Malaga or 
Alicant, when they lie down and arise, for a week. 

For a female child, let the woman lie on her left side, 
strongly fancying a female in the time of procreation, drinking 
the decoction of female mercury four days from the first 
day of purgation; the male mercury having the like operation 
in case of a male; for this concoction purges the right 
and left side of the womb, opens the receptacles, and makes 
way for the seminary of generation. The best time to beget a 
female is, when the moon is in the wane, in Libra or Aquaries. 
Advicenne says, that when the menses are spent and the 
womb cleansed, which is commonly in five or seven days at 
most, if a man lie with his wife from the first day she is 
purged to the fifth, she will conceive a male; but from the 
fifth to the eighth a female; and from the eighth to the twelfth 

a male again: but after that perhaps neither distinctly, but 
both in an hermaphrodite. In a word, they that would be 
happy in the fruits of their labour, must observe to use copulation 
in due distance of time, not too often nor too seldom, 
for both are alike hurtful; and to use it immoderately weakens 
and wastes the spirits and spoils the seed. And this much 
for the first particular. 

The second is to let the reader know how the child is formed 
in the womb, what accidents it is liable to there, and how 
nourished and brought forth. There are various opinions 
concerning this matter; therefore, I shall show what the 
learned say about it. 

Man consists of an egg, which is impregnated in the testicles 
of the woman, by the more subtle parts of the man’s 
seed; but the forming faculty and virtue in the seed is a divine 
gift, it being abundantly imbued with vital spirit, which 
gives sap and form to the embryo, so that all parts and bulk 
of the body, which is made up in a few months and gradually 
formed into the likely figure of a man, do consist in, and 
are adumbrated thereby (most sublimely expressed, Psalm 
cxxxix.: “I will praise Thee, O Lord, for I am fearfully and 

7 



The Works of Aristotle 

wonderfully made.”) 

Physicians have remarked four different times at which a 
man is framed and perfected in the womb; the first after 
coition, being perfectly formed in the week if no flux happens, 
which sometimes falls out through the slipperiness of 
the head of the matrix, that slips over like a rosebud that 
opens suddenly. The second time of forming is assigned when 
nature makes manifest mutation in the conception, so that 
all the substance seems congealed, flesh and blood, and happens 
twelve or fourteen days after copulation. And though 
this fleshy mass abounds with inflamed blood, yet it remains 
undistinguishable, without form, and may be called an embryo, 
and compared to seed sown in the ground, which, 
through heat and moisture, grows by degrees to a perfect 
form in plant or grain. The third time assigned to make up 
this fabric is when the principal parts show themselves plain; 
as the heart, whence proceed the arteries, the brain, from 
which the nerves, like small threads, run through the whole 
body; and the liver, which divides the chyle from the blood, 
brought to it by the vena porta. The two first are fountains 
of life, that nourish every part of the body, in framing which 

the faculty of the womb is bruised, from the conception of 
the eighth day of the first month. The fourth, and last, about 
the thirtieth day, the outward parts are seen nicely wrought, 
distinguished by joints, from which time it is no longer an 
embryo, but a perfect child. 

Most males are perfect by the thirtieth day, but females 
seldom before the forty-second or forty-fifth day, because 
the heat of the womb is greater in producing the male than 
the female. And, for the same reason, a woman going with a 
male child quickens in three months, but going with a female, 
rarely under four, at which time its hair and nails come 
forth, and the child begins to stir, kick and move in the womb, 
and then the woman is troubled with a loathing for meat 
and a greedy longing for things contrary to nutriment, as 
coals, rubbish, chalk, etc., which desire often occasions abortion 
and miscarriage. Some women have been so extravagant 
as to long for hob nails, leather, horse-flesh, man’s flesh, 
and other unnatural as well as unwholesome food, for want 
of which thing they have either miscarried or the child has 
continued dead in the womb for many days, to the imminent 
hazard of their lives. But I shall now proceed to show 

8 



The Works of Aristotle 

by what means the child is maintained in the womb, and 
what posture it there remains in. 

The learned Hippocrates affirms that the child, as he is 
placed in the womb, has his hands on his knees, and his 
head bent to his feet, so that he lies round together, his hands 
upon his knees and his face between them, so that each eye 
touches each thumb, and his nose betwixt his knees. And of 
the same opinion in this matter was Bartholinus. Columbus 
is of opinion that the figure of the child in the womb is 
round, the right arm bowed, the fingers under the ear, and 
about the neck, the head bowed so that the chin touches the 
breast, the left arm bowed above both breast and face and 
propped up by the bending of the right elbow; the legs are 
lifted upwards, the right so much that the thigh touches the 
belly, the knee the navel, the heel touches the left buttock, 
and the foot is turned back and covers the secrets; the left 
thigh touches the belly, and the leg lifted up to the breast. 

CHAPTER III 


The reason why children are like their parents; and that the 

Mother’s imagination contributes thereto; and whether the 

man or the woman is the cause of the male or female child. 

IN THE CASE OF SIMILITUDE, nothing is more powerful than 
the imagination of the mother; for if she fix her eyes upon 
any object it will so impress her mind, that it oftentimes so 
happens that the child has a representation thereof on some 
part of the body. And, if in act of copulation, the woman 
earnestly look on the man, and fix her mind on him, the 
child will resemble its father. Nay, if a woman, even in unlawful 
copulation, fix her mind upon her husband, the child 
will resemble him though he did not beget it. The same effect 
has imagination in occasioning warts, stains, mole-spots, 
and dartes; though indeed they sometimes happen through 
frights, or extravagant longing. Many women, in being with 
child, on seeing a hare cross the road in front of them, will, 
through the force of imagination, bring forth a child with a 
hairy lip. Some children are born with flat noses and wry 

9 



The Works of Aristotle 

mouths, great blubber lips and ill-shaped bodies; which must 
be ascribed to the imagination of the mother, who has cast 
her eyes and mind upon some ill-shaped creature. Therefore 
it behoves all women with child, if possible, to avoid such 
sights, or at least, not to regard them. But though the mother’s 
imagination may contribute much to the features of the child, 
yet, in manners, wit, and propension of the mind, experience 
tells us, that children are commonly of the condition 
with their parents, and possessed of similar tempers. But the 
vigour or disability of persons in the act of copulation many 
times cause it to be otherwise; for children begotten through 
the heat and strength of desire, must needs partake more of 
the nature and inclination of their parents, than those begotten 
at a time when desires are weaker; and, therefore, the 
children begotten by men in their old age are generally weaker 
than, those begotten by them in their youth. As to the share 
which each of the parents has in begetting the child, we will 
give the opinions of the ancients about it. 

Though it is apparent that the man’s seed is the chief efficient 
being of the action, motion, and generation: yet that 
the woman affords seed and effectually contributes in that 

point to the procreation of the child, is evinced by strong 
reasons. In the first place, seminary vessels had been given 
her in vain, and genital testicles inverted, if the woman wanted 
seminal excrescence, for nature does nothing in vain; and 
therefore we must grant, they were made for the use of seed 
and procreation, and placed in their proper parts; both the 
testicles and the receptacles of seed, whose nature is to operate 
and afford virtue to the seed. And to prove this, there 
needs no stronger argument, say they, than that if a woman 
do not use copulation to eject her seed, she often falls into 
strange diseases, as appears by young men and virgins. A 
second reason they urge is, that although the society of a 
lawful bed consists not altogether in these things, yet it is 
apparent the female sex are never better pleased, nor appear 
more blythe and jocund, than when they are satisfied this 
way; which is an inducement to believe they have more pleasure 
and titulation therein than men. For since nature causes 
much delight to accompany ejection, by the breaking forth 
of the swelling spirits and the swiftness of the nerves; in which 
case the operation on the woman’s part is double, she having 
an enjoyment both by reception and ejection, by which she 

10 



The Works of Aristotle 

is more delighted in. 

Hence it is, they say, that the child more frequently resembles 
the mother than the father, because the mother contributes 
more towards it. And they think it may be further 
instanced, from the endeared affection they bear them; for 
that, besides their contributing seminal matters, they feed 
and nourish the child with the purest fountain of blood, until 
its birth. Which opinion Galen affirms, by allowing children 
to participate most of the mother; and ascribes the difference 
of sex to the different operations of the menstrual 
blood; but this reason of the likeness he refers to the power 
of the seed; for, as the plants receive more nourishment from 
fruitful ground, than from the industry of the husbandman, 
so the infant receives more abundance from the mother than 
the father. For the seed of both is cherished in the womb, 
and then grows to perfection, being nourished with blood. 
And for this reason it is, they say, that children, for the most 
part, love their mothers best, because they receive the most 
of their substance from their mother; for about nine months 
she nourishes her child in the womb with the purest blood; 
then her love towards it newly born, and its likeness, do clearly 

show that the woman affords seed, and contributes more 
towards making the child than the man. 

But in this all the ancients were very erroneous; for the testicles, 
so called in women, afford not only seed, but are two 
eggs, like those of fowls and other creatures; neither have they 
any office like those of men, but are indeed the ovaria, wherein 
the eggs are nourished by the sanguinary vessels disposed 
throughout them; and from thence one or more as they are 
fecundated by the man’s seed is separated and conveyed into 
the womb by the ovaducts. The truth of this is plain, for if you 
boil them the liquor will be of the same colour, taste and consistency, 
with the taste of birds’ eggs. If any object that they 
have no shells, that signifies nothing: for the eggs of fowls 
while they are on the ovary, nay, after they are fastened into 
the uterus, have no shell. And though when they are laid, they 
have one, yet that is no more than a defence with which nature 
has provided them against any outward injury, while they 
are hatched without the body; whereas those of women being 
hatched within the body, need no other fence than the womb, 
by which they are sufficiently secured. And this is enough, I 
hope, for the clearing of this point. 

11 



The Works of Aristotle 

As for the third thing proposed, as whence grow the kind, 
and whether the man or the woman is the cause of the male 
or female infant—the primary cause we must ascribe to God 
as is most justly His due, who is the Ruler and Disposer of 
all things; yet He suffers many things to proceed according 
to the rules of nature by their inbred motion, according to 
usual and natural courses, without variation; though indeed 
by favour from on high, Sarah conceived Isaac; Hannah, 
Samuel; and Elizabeth, John the Baptist; but these were all 
extraordinary things, brought to pass by a Divine power, 
above the course of nature. Nor have such instances been 
wanting in later days; therefore, I shall wave them, and proceed 
to speak of things natural. 

The ancient physicians and philosophers say that since these 
two principles out of which the body of man is made, and 
which renders the child like the parents, and by one or other 
of the sex, viz., seed common to both sexes and menstrual 
blood, proper to the woman only; the similitude, say they, 
must needs consist in the force of virtue of the male or female, 
so that it proves like the one or the other, according to 
the quantity afforded by either, but that the difference of sex 

is not referred to the seed, but to the menstrual blood, which 
is proper to the woman, is apparent; for, were that force altogether 
retained in the seed, the male seed being of the hottest 
quality, male children would abound and few of the female 
be propagated; wherefore, the sex is attributed to the 
temperament or to the active qualities, which consists in heat 
and cold and the nature of the matter under them—that is, 
the flowing of the menstruous blood. But now, the seed, say 
they, affords both force to procreate and to form the child, 
as well as matter for its generation; and in the menstruous 
blood there is both matter and force, for as the seed most 
helps the maternal principle, so also does the menstrual blood 
the potential seed, which is, says Galen, blood well concocted 
by the vessels which contain it. So that the blood is not only 
the matter of generating the child, but also seed, it being 
impossible that menstrual blood has both principles. 

The ancients also say that the seed is the stronger efficient, 
the matter of it being very little in quantity, but the potential 
quality of it is very strong; wherefore, if these principles of 
generation, according to which the sex is made were only, 
say they, in the menstrual blood, then would the children be 

12 



The Works of Aristotle 

all mostly females; as were the efficient force in the seed they 
would be all males; but since both have operation in menstrual 
blood, matter predominates in quantity and in the 
seed force and virtue. And, therefore, Galen thinks that the 
child receives its sex rather from the mother than the father, 
for though his seed contributes a little to the natural principle, 
yet it is more weakly. But for likeliness it is referred 
rather to the father than to the mother. Yet the woman’s seed 
receiving strength from the menstrual blood for the space of 
nine months, overpowers the man’s in that particular, for the 
menstrual blood rather cherishes the one than the other; from 
which it is plain the woman affords both matter to make 
and force and virtue to perfect the conception; though the 
female’s be fit nutriment for the male’s by reason of the thinness 
of it, being more adapted to make up conception thereby. 
For as of soft wax or moist clay, the artificer can frame what 
he intends, so, say they, the man’s seed mixing with the 
woman’s and also with the menstrual blood, helps to make 
the form and perfect part of man. 

But, with all imaginary deference to the wisdom of our 
fathers, give me leave to say that their ignorance of the 

anatomy of man’s body have led them into the paths of error 
and ran them into great mistakes. For their hypothesis of the 
formation of the embryo from commixture of blood being 
wholly false, their opinion in this case must of necessity be 
likewise. I shall therefore conclude this chapter by observing 
that although a strong imagination of the mother may often 
determine the sex, yet the main agent in this case is the plastic 
or formative principle, according to those rules and laws 
given us by the great Creator, who makes and fashions it, 
and therein determines the sex, according to the council of 
his will. 

13 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER IV 

That Man’s Soul is not propagated by their parents, but is 
infused by its Creator, and can neither die nor corrupt. At what 
time it is infused. Of its immortality and certainty of its 
resurrection. 

MAN’S SOUL is of so divine a nature and excellency that man 
himself cannot comprehend it, being the infused breath of 
the Almighty, of an immortal nature, and not to be comprehended 
but by Him that gave it. For Moses, relating the 
history of man, tells us that “God breathed into his nostrils 
the breath of life, and he became a living soul.” Now, as for 
all other creatures, at His word they were made and had life, 
but the creature that God had set over His works was His 
peculiar workmanship, formed by Him out of the dust of 
the earth, and He condescended to breathe into his nostrils 
the breath of life, which seems to denote both care and, if we 
may so term it, labour, used about man more than about all 
other living creatures, he only partaking and participating of 
the blessed divine nature, bearing God’s image in innocence 

and purity, whilst he stood firm; and when, by his fall, that 
lively image was defaced, yet such was the love of the Creator 
towards him that he found out a way to restore him, the 
only begotten son of the Eternal Father coming into the world 
to destroy the works of the devil, and to raise up man from 
that low condition to which sin and his fall had reduced 
him, to a state above that of the angels. 

If, therefore, man would understand the excellency of his 
soul, let him turn his eyes inwardly and look unto himself and 
search diligently his own mind, and there he shall see many 
admirable gifts and excellent ornaments, that must needs fill 
him with wonder and amazement; as reason, understanding, 
freedom of will, memory, etc., that clearly show the soul to be 
descended from a heavenly original, and that therefore it is of 
infinite duration and not subject to annihilation. 

Yet for its many operations and offices while in the body it 
goes under several denominations: for when it enlivens the 
body it is called the soul; when it gives knowledge, the judgment 
of the mind; and when it recalls things past, the 
memory; when it discourses and discerns, reason; when it 
contemplates, the spirit; when it is the sensitive part, the 

14 



The Works of Aristotle 

senses. And these are the principal offices whereby the soul 
declares its powers and performs its actions. For being seated 
in the highest parts of the body it diffuses its force into every 
member. It is not propagated from the parents, nor mixed 
with gross matter, but the infused breath of God, immediately 
proceeding from Him; not passing from one to another 
as was the opinion of Pythagoras, who held a belief in 
transmigration of the soul; but that the soul is given to every 
infant by infusion, is the most received and orthodox opinion. 
And the learned do likewise agree that this is done when 
the infant is perfected in the womb, which happens about 
the twenty-fourth day after conception; especially for males, 
who are generally born at the end of nine months; but in 
females, who are not so soon formed and perfected, through 
defect of heat, until the fiftieth day. And though this day in 
either case cannot be truly set down, yet Hippocrates has 
given his opinion, that it is so when the child is formed and 
begins to move, when born in due season. In his book of the 
nature of infants, he says, if it be a male and be perfect on 
the thirtieth day, and move on the seventieth, he will be born 
in the seventh month; but if he be perfectly formed on the 

thirty-fifth day, he will move on the seventieth and will be 
born in the eighth month. Again, if he be perfectly formed 
on the forty-fifth day, he will move on the ninetieth and be 
born in the ninth month. Now from these paring of days 
and months, it plainly appears that the day of forming being 
doubled, makes up the day of moving, and the day, three 
times reckoned, makes up the day of birth. As thus, when 
thirty-five perfects the form, if you double it, makes seventy 
the day of motion; and three times seventy amounts to two 
hundred and ten days; while allowing thirty days to a month 
makes seven months, and so you must consider the rest. But 
as to a female the case is different; for it is longer perfecting 
in the womb, the mother ever going longer with a girl than 
with a boy, which makes the account differ; for a female 
formed in thirty days does not move until the seventieth 
day, and is born in the seventh month; when she is formed 
on the fortieth day, she does not move till the eightieth and 
is born in the eighth month; but, if she be perfectly formed 
on the forty-fifth day she moves on the ninetieth, and the 
child is born in the ninth month; but if she that is formed 
on the sixtieth day, moves on the one hundred and tenth 

15 



The Works of Aristotle 

day, she will be born in the tenth month. I treat the more 
largely of love that the reader may know that the reasonable 
soul is not propagated by the parents, but is infused by the 
Almighty, when the child has its perfect form, and is exactly 
distinguished in its lineaments. 

Now, as the life of every other creature, as Moses shows, is 
in the blood, so the life of man consists in the soul, which 
although subject to passion, by reason of the gross composures 
of the body, in which it has a temporary confinement, 
yet it is immortal and cannot in itself corrupt or suffer change, 
it being a spark of the Divine Mind. And that every man has 
a peculiar soul plainly appears by the vast difference between 
the will, judgment, opinions, manners, and affections in men. 
This David observes when he says: “God hath fashioned the 
hearts and minds of men, and has given to every one his 
own being and a soul of its own nature.” Hence Solomon 
rejoiced that God had given him a soul, and a body agreeable 
to it. It has been disputed among the learned in what 
part of the body the soul resides; some are of opinion its 
residence is in the middle of the heart, and from thence communicates 
itself to every part, which Solomon (Prov. iv. 23) 

seems to confirm when he says: “Keep thy heart with all 
diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.” But many curious 
physicians, searching the works of nature in man’s 
anatomy, do affirm that its chief seat is in the brain, from 
whence proceed the senses, the faculties, and actions, diffusing 
the operations of the soul through all parts of the body, 
whereby it is enlivened with heat and force to the heart, by 
the arteries, corodities, or sleepy arteries, which part upon 
the throat; which, if they happen to be broken or cut, they 
cause barrenness, and if stopped an apoplexy; for there must 
necessarily be ways through which the spirits, animal and 
vital, may have intercourse and convey native heat from the 
soul. For though the soul has its chief seat in one place, it 
operates in every part, exercising every member which are 
the soul’s instruments, by which she discovers her power. 
But if it happen that any of the original parts are out of tune, 
its whole work is confused, as appears in idiots and mad 
men; though, in some of them, the soul, by a vigorous exertion 
of its power, recovers its innate strength and they become 
right after a long despondency in mind, but in others 
it is not recovered again in this life. For, as fire under ashes, 

16 



The Works of Aristotle 

or the sun obscured from our sight by thick clouds, afford 
not their native lustre, so the soul, overwhelmed in moist or 
morbid matter, is darkened and reason thereby overclouded; 
and though reason shines less in children than it does in 
such as are arrived at maturity, yet no man must imagine 
that the soul of an infant grows up with the child, for then 
would it again decay; but it suits itself to nature’s weakness, 
and the imbecility of the body wherein it is placed, that it 
may operate the better. And as the body is more capable of 
recovering its influence, so the soul does more and more exert 
its faculties, having force and endowment at the time it 
enters the form of a child in the womb; for its substance can 
receive nothing less. And thus much to prove that the soul 
does not come from the parents, but is infused by God. I 
shall next prove its immortality and demonstrate the certainty 
of our resurrection. 

OF THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

THAT THE SOUL OF MAN IS A DIVINE RAY, infused by the Sovereign 
Creator, I have already proved, and now come to show 
that whatever immediately proceeds from Him, and participates 
of His nature, must be as immortal as its original; for, 
though all other creatures are endowed with life and motion, 
they yet lack a reasonable soul, and from thence it is 
concluded that their life is in their blood, and that being 
corruptible they perish and are no more; but man being endowed 
with a reasonable soul and stamped with a Divine 
image, is of a different nature, and though his body is corruptible, 
yet his soul being of an immortal nature cannot 
perish; but at the dissolution of the body returns to God 
who gave it, either to receive reward or punishment. Now, 
that the body can sin of itself is impossible, because wanting 
the soul, which is the principle of life, it cannot act nor proceed 
to anything either good or evil; for could it do so, it 
might even sin in the grave. But it is plain that after death 
there is a cessation; for as death leaves us so judgment will 
find us. 

17 



The Works of Aristotle 

Now, reason having evidently demonstrated the soul’s immortality, 
the Holy Scriptures do abundantly give testimony 
of the truth of the resurrection, as the reader may see by 
perusing the 14th and 19th chapters of Job and 5th of John. 
I shall, therefore, leave the further discussion of this matter 
to divines, whose province it is, and return to treat of the 
works of nature. 

CHAPTER V 

Of Monsters and Monstrous Births; and the several reasons 
thereof, according to the opinions of the Ancients. Also, 
whether the Monsters are endowed with reasonable Souls; and 
whether the Devils can engender; is here briefly discussed. 

BY THE ANCIENTS, monsters are ascribed to depraved conceptions, 
and are designated as being excursions of nature, which 
are vicious in one of these four ways: either in figure, magnitude, 
situation, or number. 

In figure, when a man bears the character of a beast, as did 
the beast in Saxony. In magnitude, when one part does not 
equalise with another; as when one part is too big or too 
little for the other parts of the body. But this is so common 
among us that I need not produce a testimony. 

I now proceed to explain the cause of their generation, 
which is either divine or natural. The divine cause proceeds 
from God’s permissive will, suffering parents to bring forth 
abominations for their filthy and corrupt affections, which 
are let loose unto wickedness like brute beasts which have no 

18 



The Works of Aristotle 

understanding. Wherefore it was enacted among the ancient 
Romans that those who were in any way deformed, should 
not be admitted into religious houses. And St. Jerome was 
grieved in his time to see the lame and the deformed offering 
up spiritual sacrifices to God in religious houses. And 
Keckerman, by way of inference, excludes all that are illshapen 
from this presbyterian function in the church. And 
that which is of more force than all, God himself commanded 
Moses not to receive such to offer sacrifice among his people; 
and he also renders the reason Leviticus, xxii. 28, “Lest he 
pollute my sanctuaries.” Because of the outward deformity, 
the body is often a sign of the pollution of the heart, as a 
curse laid on the child for the incontinency of its parents. 
Yet it is not always so. Let us therefore duly examine and 
search out the natural cause of their generation, which (according 
to the ancients who have dived into the secrets of 
nature) is either in the mother or in the agent, in the seed, or 
in the womb. 

The matter may be in default two ways—by defect or by 
excess: by defect, when the child has only one arm; by excess, 
when it has four hands or two heads. Some monsters 

are begotten by a woman’s unnatural lying with beasts; as in 
the year 1603, there was a monster begotten by a woman’s 
generating with a dog; which from the navel upwards had 
the perfect resemblance of its mother: but from its navel 
downwards it resembled a dog. 

The agent or womb may be in fault three ways; firstly, the 
formative faculty, which may be too strong or too weak, by 
which is procured a depraved figure; secondly, to the instrument 
or place of conception, the evil confirmation or the 
disposition whereof will cause a monstrous birth; thirdly, in 
the imaginative power at the time of conception; which is of 
such a force that it stamps the character of the thing imagined 
on the child. Thus the children of an adulteress may be 
like her husband, though begotten by another man, which 
is caused through the force of imagination that the woman 
has of her own husband at the act of coition. And I have 
heard of a woman, who, at the time of conception, beholding 
the picture of a blackamoor, conceived and brought forth 
an Ethiopian. I will not trouble you with more human testimonies, 
but conclude with a stronger warrant. We read (Gen. 

xxx. 31) how Jacob having agreed with Laban to have all the 
19 



The Works of Aristotle 

spotted sheep for keeping his flock to augment his wages, 
took hazel rods and peeled white streaks on them, and laid 
them before the sheep when they came to drink, which coupling 
together there, whilst they beheld the rods, conceived 
and brought forth young. 

“Where children thus are born with hairy coats 
Heaven’s wrath unto the kingdom it denotes” 

Another monster representing a hairy child. It was all covered 
with hair like a beast. That which made it more frightful 
was, that its navel was in the place where its nose should 
stand, and its eyes placed where the mouth should have been, 
and its mouth placed in the chin. It was of the male kind, 
and was born in France, in the year 1597, at a town called 
Arles in Provence, and lived a few days, frightening all that 
beheld it. It was looked upon as a forerunner of desolations 
which soon after happened to that kingdom, in which men 
to each other were more like brutes than human creatures. 

There was a monster born at Nazara in the year 1530. It 
had four arms and four legs. 

The imagination also works on the child, after conception, 
of which we have a pregnant instance. 

A worthy gentlewoman in Suffolk, who being with child 
and passing by a butcher who was killing his meat, a drop of 
blood sprung on her face, whereupon she said her child would 
have a blemish on its face, and at the birth it was found 
marked with a red spot. 

Likewise in the reign of Henry III, there was a woman 
delivered of a child having two heads and four arms, and the 
bodies were joined at the back; the heads were so placed that 
they looked contrary ways; each had two distinct arms and 
hands. They would both laugh, both speak, and both cry, 
and be hungry together; sometimes the one would speak and 
the other keep silence, and sometimes both speak together. 
They lived several years, but one outlived the other three 
years, carrying the dead one (for there was no parting them) 
till the survivor fainted with the burden, and more with the 
stench of the dead carcase. 

It is certain that monstrous births often happen by means 
of undue copulation; for some there are, who, having been 
long absent from one another, and having an eager desire for 

20 



The Works of Aristotle 

enjoyment, consider not as they ought, to do as their circumstances 
demand. And if it happen that they come together 
when the woman’s menses are flowing, and notwithstanding, 
proceed to the act of copulation, which is both 
unclean and unnatural, the issue of such copulation does 
often prove monstrous, as a just punishment for doing what 
nature forbids. And, therefore, though men should be ever 
so eager for it, yet women, knowing their own condition, 
should at such times positively refuse their company. And 
though such copulations do not always produce monstrous 
birth, yet the children, thus begotten, are generally heavy, 
dull, and sluggish, besides defective in their understandings, 
lacking the vivacity and loveliness with which children begotten 
in proper season are endowed. 

In Flanders, between Antwerp and Mechlin, in a village 
called Uthaton, a child was born which had two heads, four 
arms, seeming like two girls joined together, having two of 
their arms lifted up between and above their heads, the thighs 
being placed as it were across one another, according to the 
figure on p. 39. How long they lived I had no account of. 

By the figure on p. 40 you may see that though some of 

the members are wanting, yet they are supplied by other 
members. 

It remains now that I make some inquiry whether those 
that are born monsters have reasonable souls, and are capable 
of resurrection. And here both divines and physicians are of 
opinion that those who, according to the order of generations 
deduced from our first parents, proceed by mutual means from 
either sex, though their outward shape be deformed and monstrous, 
have notwithstanding a reasonable soul, and consequently 
their bodies are capable of resurrection, as other men’s 
and women’s are; but those monsters that are not begotten by 
men, but are the product of women’s unnatural lusts in copulating 
with other creatures shall perish as the brute beasts by 
whom they were begotten, not having a reasonable soul nor 
any breath of the Almighty infused into them; and such can 
never be capable of resurrection. And the same is also true of 
imperfect and abortive births. 

Some are of opinion that monsters may be engendered by 
some infernal spirit. Of this mind was Adigus Fariur, speaking 
of a deformed monster born at Craconia; and Hieronimus 
Cardamnus wrote of a maid that was got with child by the 

21 



The Works of Aristotle 

devil, she thinking it had been a fair young man. The like 
also is recorded by Vicentius, of the prophet Merlin, that he 
was begotten by an evil spirit. But what a repugnance it would 
be both to religion and nature, if the devils could beget men; 
when we are taught to believe that not any was ever begotten 
without human seed, except the Son of God. The devil then 
being a spirit and having no corporeal substance, has therefore 
no seed of generation; to say that he can use the act of 
generation effectually is to affirm that he can make something 
out of nothing, and consequently to affirm the devil 
to be God, for creation belongs to God only. Again, if the 
devil could assume to himself a human body and enliven the 
faculties of it, and cause it to generate, as some affirm he 
can, yet this body must bear the image of the devil. And it 
borders on blasphemy to think that God should so far give 
leave to the devil as out of God’s image to raise his own diabolical 
offspring. In the school of Nature we are taught the 
contrary, viz., that like begets like; therefore, of a devil cannot 
man be born. Yet, it is not denied, but the devils, transforming 
themselves into human shapes, may abuse both men 
and women, and, with wicked people, use carnal copula


tion; but that any unnatural conjunction can bring forth a 
human creature is contrary to nature and all religion. 

22 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER VI

 Of the happy state of matrimony, as it is appointed by 
God, the true felicity that rebounds thereby to either sex; and 
to what end it is ordained. 

WITHOUT DOUBT the uniting of hearts in holy wedlock is of 
all conditions the happiest; for then a man has a second self 
to whom he can reveal his thoughts, as well as a sweet companion 
in his labours, toils, trials, and difficulties. He has 
one in whose breast, as in a safe cabinet, he can confide his 
inmost secrets, especially where reciprocal love and inviolable 
faith is centred; for there no care, fear, jealousy, mistrust 
or hatred can ever interpose. For base is the man that 
hateth his own flesh! And truly a wife, if rightly considered, 
as Adam well observed, is or ought to be esteemed of every 
honest man as “Bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh,” etc. 
Nor was it the least care of the Almighty to ordain so near a 
union, and that for two causes; the first, for the increase of 
posterity; the second, to restrain man’s wandering desires and 
affections; nay, that they might be yet happier, when God 

has joined them together, he “blessed them,” as in Gen. ii. 
An ancient writer, contemplating this happy state, says, in 
the economy of Xenophon, “that the marriage bed is not 
only the most pleasant, but also profitable course of life, that 
may be entered on for the preservation and increase of posterity. 
Wherefore, since marriage is the most safe, and delightful 
situation of man he does in no ways provide amiss 
for his own tranquillity who enters into it, especially when 
he comes to maturity of years.” 

There are many abuses in marriage contrary to what is 
ordained, the which in the ensuing chapter I shall expose to 
view. But to proceed: Seeing our blessed Saviour and His 
holy apostles detested unlawful lusts, and pronounced those 
to be excluded the kingdom of heaven that polluted themselves 
with adultery and whoring, I cannot conceive what 
face people have to colour their impieties, who hating matrimony, 
make it their study how they may live licentiously: 
for, in so doing, they take in themselves torment, enmity, 
disquietude, rather than certain pleasure, not to mention the 
hazard of their immortal soul; and certain it is that mercenary 
love (or as the wise man called it harlot-smiles) cannot 

23 



The Works of Aristotle 

be true and sincere and therefore not pleasant, but rather a 
net laid to betray such as trust in them with all mischief, as 
Solomon observes of the young man void of understanding, 
who turned aside to the harlot’s house, “as a bird to the snare 
of the fowler, or as an ox to the slaughter, till a dart was 
struck through his liver.” Nor in this case can they have children, 
those endearing pledges of conjugal affection; or if they 
have, they will rather redound to their shame than comfort, 
bearing the odious brand of bastards. Harlots, likewise are 
like swallows, flying in the summer season of prosperity; but 
the black stormy weather of adversity coming, they take wing 
and fly into other regions—that is, seek other lovers; but a 
virtuous, chaste wife, fixing her entire love upon her husband, 
and submitting to him as her head and king, by whose 
directions she ought to steer in all lawful courses, will, like a 
faithful companion, share patiently with him in all adversities, 
run with cheerfulness through all difficulties and dangers, 
though ever so hazardous, to preserve and assist him, in 
poverty, sickness, or whatsoever misfortunes befall him, acting 
according to her duty in all things; but a proud, imperious 
harlot will do no more than she lists, in the sunshine of 

prosperity; and like a horse-leech, ever craving, and never 
satisfied; still seeming displeased, if all her extravagant cravings 
be not answered; not regarding the ruin and misery she brings 
on him by those means, though she seems to doat upon him, 
used to confirming her hypocrisy with crocodile tears, vows 
and swoonings, when her cully has to depart awhile, or seems 
but to deny immediate desires; yet this lasts no longer than 
she can gratify her appetite, and prey upon his fortune. 

Now, on the contrary, a loving, chaste and even-tempered 
wife, seeks what she may to prevent such dangers, and in 
every condition does all she can to make him easy. And, in a 
word, as there is no content in the embraces of a harlot, so 
there is no greater joy in the reciprocal affection and endearing 
embraces of a loving, obedient, and chaste wife. Nor is 
that the principal end for which matrimony was ordained, 
but that the man might follow the law of his creation by 
increasing his kind and replenishing the earth; for this was 
the injunction laid upon him in Paradise, before his fall. To 
conclude, a virtuous wife is a crown and ornament to her 
husband, and her price is above all rubies: but the ways of a 
harlot are deceitful. 

24 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER VII 


Of Errors in Marriages; Why they are, and the Injuries caused 
by them. 

BY ERRORS IN MARRIAGE, I mean the unfitness of the persons 
marrying to enter into this state, and that both with respect 
to age and the constitution of their bodies; and, therefore, 
those who design to enter into that condition ought to observe 
their ability and not run themselves into inconveniences; 
for those that marry too young may be said to marry unseasonably, 
not considering their inability, nor examining the 
forces of nature; for some, before they are ripe for the consummation 
of so weighty a matter, who either rashly, of their 
own accord, or by the instigation of procurers or marriage-
brokers, or else forced thereto by their parents who covet a 
large dower take upon them this yoke to their prejudice; by 
which some, before the expiration of a year, have been so 
enfeebled, that all their vital moisture has been exhausted; 
which had not been restored again without great trouble and 
the use of medicines. Therefore, my advice is: that it is not 

convenient to suffer children, or such as are not of age, to 
marry, or get children. 

He that proposes to marry, and wishes to enjoy happiness 
in that state, should choose a wife descended from honest 
and temperate parents, she being chaste, well bred, and of 
good manners. For if a woman has good qualities, she has 
portion enough. That of Alcmena, in Plautus, is much to 
the purpose, where he brings in a young woman speaking 
thus:— 

“I take not that to be my dowry, which 
The vulgar sort do wealth and honour call; 
That all my wishes terminate in this:—— 
I’ll obey my husband and be chaste withall; 
To have God’s fear, and beauty in my mind, 
To do those good who are virtuously inclined.” 


And I think she was in the right, for such a wife is more 
precious than rubies. 

It is certainly the duty of parents to bring up their children 
in the ways of virtue, and to have regard to their honour and 

25 



The Works of Aristotle 

reputation; and especially to virgins, when grown to be marriageable. 
For, as has been noted, if through the too great 
severity of parents, they may be crossed in their love, many 
of them throw themselves into the unchaste arms of the first 
alluring tempter that comes in the way, being, through the 
softness and flexibility of their nature, and the strong desire 
they have after what nature strongly incites them to, easily 
induced to believe men’s false vows of promised marriage, to 
cover their shame: and then too late, their parents repent of 
their severity which has brought an indelible stain upon their 
families. 

Conception 
First Month 
Second Month 
Third Month 
Fourth Month] 


Fifth Month 
Sixth Month 
Seventh Month 


Eighth Month 
Ninth Month 


Another error in marriage is, the inequality of years in the 
parties married; such as for a young man, who, to advance 
his fortune, marries a woman old enough to be his grandmother: 
between whom, for the most part, strife, jealousies, 
and dissatisfaction are all the blessings which crown the genial 
bed, is being impossible for such to have any children. 
The like may be said, though with a little excuse, when an 
old doting widower marries a virgin in the prime of her youth 
and her vigour, who, while he vainly tries to please her, is 
thereby wedded to his grave. For, as in green youth, it is 
unfit and unseasonable to think of marriage, so to marry in 
old age is just the same; for they that enter upon it too soon 
are soon exhausted, and fall into consumptions and divers 
other diseases; and those who procrastinate and marry 
unseemingly, fall into the like troubles; on the other side 
having only this honour, if old men, they become young 
cuckolds, especially if their wives have not been trained up 
in the paths of virtue, and lie too much open to the impor


26 



The Works of Aristotle 

tunity and temptation of lewd and debauched men. And 
thus much for the errors of rash and inconsiderate marriages. 

CHAPTER VIII 


The Opinion of the Learned concerning Children conceived 
and born within Seven Months; with Arguments upon the 
Subject to prevent Suspicion of Incontinency, and bitter 
Contest on that Account. To which are added Rules to Know 
the Disposition of Man’s Body by the Genital Parts. 

MANY BITTER QUARRELS happen between men and their wives 
upon the man’s supposition that the child comes too soon, 
and by consequence, that he could not be the father; whereas, 
it is the want of understanding the secrets of nature which 
brings the man into that error; and which, had he known, 
might have cured him of his suspicion and jealousy. 

To remove which, I shall endeavour to prove, that it is 
possible, and has been frequently known, that children have 
been born at seven months. Paul, the Counsel, has this passage 
in the 19th Book of Pleadings, viz.: “It is now a received 
truth, that a perfect child may be born in the seventh month, 
by the authority of the learned Hippocrates; and therefore, 
we must believe that a child born at the end of the seventh 

27 



The Works of Aristotle 

month in lawful matrimony may be lawfully begotten.” 

Galen is of opinion that there is no certain time set for the 
bearing of children; and that from Pliny’s authority, who 
makes mention of a woman that went thirteen months with 
child; but as to what concerns the seventh month, a learned 
author says, “I know several married people in Holland that 
had twins born in the seventh month, who lived to old age, 
having lusty bodies and lively minds. Wherefore their opinion 
is absurd, who assert that a child at seven months cannot 
be perfect and long lived; and that it cannot in all parts be 
perfect until the ninth month.” Thereupon the author proceeds 
to tell a passage from his own knowledge, viz.: “Of late 
there happened a great disturbance among us, which ended 
not without bloodshed; and was occasioned by a virgin, whose 
chastity had been violated, descending from a noble family 
of unspotted fame. Several charged the fact upon the Judge, 
who was president of a city in Flanders, who firmly denied 
it, saying he was ready to take his oath that he never had any 
carnal copulation with her, and that he would not father 
that, which was none of his; and farther argued, that he verily 
believed it was a child born in seven months, himself 

being many miles distant from the mother of it when it was 
conceived. Upon which the judges decreed that the child 
should be viewed by able physicians and experienced women, 
and that they should make their report. They having made 
diligent inquiry, all of them with one mind, concluded the 
child, without discussing who was the father, was born within 
the space of seven months, and that it was carried in the 
mother’s womb but twenty-seven weeks and some odd days; 
but if she should have gone full nine months, the child’s 
parts and limbs would have been more firm and strong, and 
the structure of the body more compact; for the skin was 
very loose, and the breast bone that defends the heart, and 
the gristles that lay over the stomach, lay higher than naturally 
they should be, not plain, but crooked and sharp, rigid 
or pointed, like those of a young chicken hatched in the 
beginning of spring. And being a female, it wanted nails upon 
the joints of the fingers; upon which, from the masculous 
cartilaginous matter of the skin, nails that are very smooth 
do come, and by degrees harden; she had, instead of nails, a 
thin skin or film. As for her toes, there were no signs of nails 
upon them, wanting the heat which was expanded to the 

28 



The Works of Aristotle 

fingers from the nearness of the heart. All this was considered, 
and above all, one gentlewoman of quality that assisted, 
affirming that she had been the mother of nineteen children, 
and that divers of them had been born and lived at 
seven months, though within the seventh month. For in such 
cases, the revolution of the month ought to be observed, 
which perfects itself in four bare weeks, or somewhat less 
than twenty-eight days; in which space of the revolution, 
the blood being agitated by the force of the moon, the courses 
of women flow from them; which being spent, and the matrix 
cleansed from the menstruous blood which happens on 
the fourth day, then, if a man on the seventh day lie with his 
wife, the copulation is most natural, and then the conception 
is best: and the child thus begotten may be born in the 
seventh month and prove very healthful. So that on this report, 
the supposed father was pronounced innocent; the proof 
that he was 100 miles distant all that month in which the 
child was begotten; as for the mother she strongly denied 
that she knew the father, being forced in the dark; and so, 
through fear and surprise, was left in ignorance.” 

As for coition, it ought not to be used unless the parties be 

in health, lest it turn to the disadvantage of the children so 
begotten, creating in them, through the abundance of ill 
humours, divers languishing diseases. Wherefore, health is 
no better discerned than by the genitals of the man; for which 
reasons midwives, and other skilful women, were formerly 
wont to see the testicles of children, thereby to conjecture 
their temperature and state of body; and young men may 
know thereby the signs and symptoms of death; for if the 
cases of the testicles be loose and feeble, which are the proofs 
of life, are fallen, but if the secret parts are wrinkled and 
raised up, it is a sign that all is well, but that the event may 
exactly answer the prediction, it is necessary to consider what 
part of the body the disease possesseth; for if it chance to be 
the upper part that is afflicted, as the head or stomach, then 
it will not so then appear by the members, which are unconnected 
with such grievances; but the lower part of the body 
exactly sympathising with them, their liveliness, on the contrary, 
makes it apparent; for nature’s force, and the spirits 
that have their intercourse, first manifest themselves therein; 
which occasions midwives to feel the genitals of children, to 
know in what part the gulf is residing, and whether life or 

29 



The Works of Aristotle 

death be portended thereby, the symptoms being strongly 
communicated to the vessels, that have their intercourse with 
the principal seat of life. 

CHAPTER IX 


Of the Green-Sickness in Virgins, with its causes, signs and 
cures; together with the chief occasions of Barrenness in 
Women, and the Means to remove the Cause, and render 
them fruitful. 

THE GREEN-SICKNESS is so common a complaint amongst virgins, 
especially those of a phlegmatic complexion, that it is 
easily discerned, showing itself by discolouring the face, 
making it look green, pale, and of a dusty colour, proceeding 
from raw and indigested humours; nor doth it only appear 
to the eye, but sensibly affects the person with difficulty of 
breathing, pains in the head, palpitation of the heart, with 
unusual beatings and small throbbings of the arteries in the 
temples, back and neck, which often cast them into fevers 
when the humour is over vicious; also loathing of meat and 
the distention of the hypochondriac part, by reason of the 
inordinate effluxion of the menstruous blood of the greater 
vessels; and from the abundance of humours, the whole body 
is often troubled with swellings, or at least the thighs, legs 

30 



The Works of Aristotle 

and ankles, all above the heels; there is also a weariness of the 
body without any reason for it. 

The Galenical physicians affirm, that this distemper proceeds 
from the womb; occasioned by the gross, vicious and 
rude humours arising from several inward causes; but there 
are also outward causes which have a share in the production 
of it; as taking cold in the feet, drinking of water, intemperance 
of diet, eating things contrary to nature, viz., raw or 
burnt flesh, ashes, coals, old shoes, chalk, wax, nutshells, 
mortar, lime, oatmeal, tobacco pipes, etc., which occasion 
both a suppression of the menses and obstructions through 
the whole body; therefore, the first thing necessary to vindicate 
the cause, is matrimonial conjunction, and such copulation 
as may prove satisfactory to her that is afflicted, for 
then the menses will begin to flow according to their natural 
and due course, and the humours being dispersed, will soon 
waste themselves; and then no more matter being admitted 
to increase them, they will vanish and a good temperament 
of body will return; but in case this best remedy cannot be 
had soon enough, then let blood in the ankles, and if she be 
about sixteen, you may likewise do it in the arm, but let her 

be bled sparingly, especially if the blood be good. If the disease 
be of any continuance, then it is to be eradicated by 
purging, preparation of the humour being first considered, 
which may be done by the virgin’s drinking the decoction of 
guaiacum, with dittany of erete; but the best purge in this 
case ought to be made of aloes, agaric, senna, rhubarb; and 
for strengthening the bowels and removing obstructions, 
chaly-beate medicines are chiefly to be used. The diet must 
be moderate, and sharp things by all means avoided. 

And now, since barrenness daily creates discontent, and 
that discontent breeds indifference between man and wife, 
or, by immediate grief, frequently casts the woman into one 
or another distemper, I shall in the next place treat thereof. 

OF BARRENNESS 

Formerly, before women came to the marriage-bed, they were 
first searched by the mid-wife, and those only which she 
allowed of as fruitful were admitted. I hope, therefore, it will 
not be amiss to show you how they may prove themselves 

31 



The Works of Aristotle 

and turn barren ground into fruitful soil. Barrenness is a 
deprivation of the life and power which ought to be in the 
seed to procreate and propagate; for which end men and 
women were made. Causes of barrenness may be over much 
cold or heat, drying up the seed and corrupting it, which 
extinguishes the life of the seed, making it waterish and unfit 
for generation. It may be caused also, by the not flowing 
or over-flowing of the courses by swellings, ulcers, and inflammation 
of the womb, by an excrescence of flesh growing 
about the mouth of the matrix, by the mouth of the matrix 
being turned up to the back or side by the fatness of the 
body, whereby the mouth of the matrix is closed up, being 
pressed with the omentum or caul, and the matter of the 
seed is turned to fat; if she be a lean and dry body, and though 
she do conceive, yet the fruit of her body will wither before 
it come to perfection, for want of nourishment. One main 
cause of barrenness is attributed to want of a convenient 
moderating quality, which the woman ought to have with 
the man; as, if he be hot, she must be cold; if he be dry, she 
must be moist; as, if they be both dry or both moist of constitution, 
they cannot propagate; and yet, simply consider


ing of themselves, they are not barren, for she who was before 
as the barren fig-tree being joined to an apt constitution 
becomes as the fruitful vine. And that a man and woman, 
being every way of like constitution, cannot create, I will 
bring nature itself for a testimony, who hath made man of a 
better constitution than woman, that the quality of the one, 
may moderate the quality of the other. 

SIGNS OF BARRENNESS 

If barrenness proceeds from overmuch heat, if she is a dry 
body, subject to anger, has black hair, quick pulse, and her 
purgations flow but little, and that with pain, she loves to 
play in the courts of Venus. But if it comes by cold, then the 
signs are contrary to the above mentioned. If through the 
evil quality of the womb, make a suffumigation of red styrax, 
myrrh, cassia-wood, nutmeg, and cinnamon; and let her receive 
the fumes into her womb, covering her very close; and 
if the odour so received passes through the body to the mouth 
and nostrils, she is fruitful. But if she feels not the fumes in 

32 



The Works of Aristotle 

her mouth and nostrils, it argues barrenness one of these 
ways—that the spirit of the seed is either extinguished 
through cold, or dissipated through heat. If any woman be 
suspected to be unfruitful, cast natural brimstone, such as is 
digged out of mines, into her urine, and if worms breed 
therein, she is not barren. 

PROGNOSTICS 

Barrenness makes women look young, because they are free 
from those pains and sorrows which other women are accustomed 
to. Yet they have not the full perfection of health which 
other women enjoy, because they are not rightly purged of 
the menstruous blood and superfluous seed, which are the 
principal cause of most uterine diseases. 

First, the cause must be removed, the womb strengthened, 
and the spirits of the seed enlivened. If the womb be over 
hot, take syrup of succory, with rhubarb, syrup of violets, 
roses, cassia, purslain. Take of endive, water-lilies, borage flowers, 
of each a handful; rhubarb, mirobalans, of each three 

drachms; make a decoction with water, and to the straining 
of the syrup add electuary violets one ounce, syrup of cassia 
half an ounce, manna three drachms; make a potion. Take of 
syrup of mugwort one ounce, syrup of maiden-hair two 
ounces, pulv-elect triasand one drachm; make a julep. Take 
prus. salt, elect. ros. mesua, of each three drachms, rhubarb 
one scruple, and make a bolus; apply to the loins and privy 
parts fomentations of the juice of lettuce, violets, roses, 
malloes, vine leaves and nightshade; anoint the secret parts 
with the cooling unguent of Galen. 

If the power of the seed be extinguished by cold, take every 
morning two spoonfuls of cinnamon water, with one 
scruple of mithridate. Take syrup of calamint, mugwort and 
betony, of each one ounce; waters of pennyroyal, feverfew, 
hyssop and sage, of each two ounces; make a julep. Take oil 
of aniseed two scruples and a half; diacimini, 
diacliathidiamosei and diagla-ongoe, of each one drachm, 
sugar four ounces, with water of cinnamon, and make lozenges; 
take of them a drachm and a half twice a day, two 
hours before meals; fasten cupping glasses to the hips and 
belly. Take of styrax and calamint one ounce, mastick, cin


33 



The Works of Aristotle 

namon, nutmeg, lign, aloes, and frankincense, of each half 
ounce; musk, ten grains, ambergris, half a scruple; make a 
confection with rosewater, divide it into four equal parts; 
one part make a pomatum oderation to smell at if she be not 
hysterical; of the second, make a mass of pills, and let her 
take three every other night: of the third make a pessary, dip 
it in oil of spikenard, and put it up; of the fourth, make a 
suffumigation for the womb. 

If the faculties of the womb be weakened, and the life of 
the seed suffocated by over much humidity flowing to those 
parts: take of betony, marjoram, mugwort, pennyroyal and 
balm, of each a handful; roots of alum and fennel, of each 
two drachms; aniseed and cummin, of each one drachm, 
with sugar and water a sufficient quantity; make a syrup, 
and take three ounces every morning. 

Purge with the following things; take of the diagnidium, 
two grains, spicierum of castor, a scruple, pill foedit two 
scruples, with syrup of mugwort, make six pills. Take apeo, 
diagem. diamoser, diamb. of each one drachm; cinnamon, 
one drachm and a half; cloves, mace and nutmeg, of each 
half a drachm; sugar six ounces, with water of feverfew; make 

lozenges, to be taken every morning. Take of decoction of 
sarsaparilla and virga aurea, not forgetting sage, which 
Agrippa, wondering at its operation, has honoured with the 
name of sacra herba, a holy herb. It is recorded by Dodonoeus 
in the History of Plants, lib. ii. cap. 77, that after a great mortality 
among the Egyptians, the surviving women, that they 
might multiply quickly, were commanded to drink the juice 
of sage, and to anoint the genitals with oil of aniseed and 
spikenard. Take mace, nutmeg, cinnamon, styrax and amber, 
of each one drachm; cloves, laudanum, of each half a 
drachm; turpentine, a sufficient quantity; trochisks, to 
smooth the womb. Take roots of valerian and elecampane, 
of each one pound; galanga, two ounces; origan lavender, 
marjoram, betony, mugwort, bay leaves, calamint, of each a 
handful; make an infusion with water, in which let her sit, 
after she hath her courses. 

If barrenness proceed from dryness, consuming the matter 
of the seed; take every day almond milk, and goat’s milk 
extracted with honey, but often of the root satyrion, candied, 
and electuary of diasyren. Take three wethers’ heads, 
boil them until all the flesh comes from the bones, then take 

34 



The Works of Aristotle 

melilot, violets, camomiles, mercury, orchia with their roots, 
of each a handful; fenugreek, linseed, valerian roots, of each 
one pound; let all these be decocted in the aforesaid broth, 
and let the woman sit in the decoction up to the navel. 

If barrenness be caused by any proper effect of the womb, 
the cure is set down in the second book. Sometimes the womb 
proves barren where there is no impediment on either side, 
except only in the manner of the act; as when in the emission 
of the seed, the man is quick and the woman is slow, 
whereby there is not an emission of both seeds at the same 
instant as the rules of conception require. Before the acts of 
coition, foment the privy parts with the decoction of betony, 
sage, hyssop and calamint and anoint the mouth and neck 
of the womb with musk and civet. 

The cause of barrenness being removed, let the womb be 
strengthened as follows; Take of bay berries, mastic, nutmeg, 
frankincense, nuts, laudanum, giapanum, of each one drachm, 
styracis liquid, two scruples, cloves half a scruple, ambergris 
two grains, then make a pessary with oil of spikenard. 

Take of red roses, lapididis hoematis, white frankincense, 
of each half an ounce. Dragon’s blood, fine bole, mastic, of 

each two drachms; nutmeg, cloves, of each one drachm; spikenard, 
half a scruple, with oil of wormwood; make a plaster 
for the lower part of the belly, then let her eat candied eringo 
root, and make an injection only of the roots of satyrion. 

The aptest time for conception is instantly after the menses 
have ceased, because then the womb is thirsty and dry, apt 
both to draw the seed and return it, by the roughness of the 
inward surface, and besides, in some, the mouth of the womb 
is turned into the back or side, and is not placed right until 
the last day of the courses. 

Excess in all things is to be avoided. Lay aside all passions 
of the mind, shun study and care, as things that are enemies 
to conception, for if a woman conceive under such circumstances, 
however wise the parents may be, the children, at 
best, will be but foolish; because the mental faculties of the 
parents, viz., the understanding and the rest (from whence 
the child derives its reason) are, as it were, confused through 
the multiplicity of cares and thought; of which we have examples 
in learned men, who, after great study and care, having 
connection with their wives, often beget very foolish 
children. A hot and moist air is most suitable, as appears by 

35 



The Works of Aristotle 

the women in Egypt, who often bring forth three or four 
children at one time. 

CHAPTER X 


Virginity, what it is, in what it consists, and how vitiated; 
together with the Opinions of the Learned about the Change 
of Sex in the Womb, during the Operation of Nature in 
forming the Body. 

THERE ARE MANY IGNORANT PEOPLE that boast of their skill in 
the knowledge of virginity, and some virgins have undergone 
harsh censures through their ignorant conclusions; I 
therefore thought it highly necessary to clear up this point, 
that the towering imaginations of conceited ignorance might 
be brought down, and the fair sex (whose virtues are so illustriously 
bright that they excite our wonder and command 
our imitation), may be freed from the calumnies and detractions 
of ignorance and envy; and so their honour may continue 
as unspotted, as they have kept their persons uncontaminated 
and free from defilement. 

Virginity, in a strict sense, signifies the prime, the chief, 
the best of anything; and this makes men so desirous of marrying 
virgins, imagining some secret pleasure is to be en


36 



The Works of Aristotle 

joyed in their embraces, more than in those of widows, or of 
such as have been lain with before, though not many years 
ago, a very great personage thought differently, and to use 
his own expression:—“The getting a maidenhead was such 
a piece of drudgery, that it was fitter for a coal heaver than a 
prince.”1 But this was only his opinion, for I am sure that 
other men think differently. 

The curious inquirers into the secrets of Nature, have observed, 
that in young maidens in the sinus pudoris, or in what 
is called the neck of the womb, is that wonderful production 
usually called the hymen, but in French bouton de rose, or rosebud, 
because it resembles the expanded bud of a rose or a gilly 
flower. From this the word defloro, or, deflower, is derived, 
and hence taking away virginity is called deflowering a virgin, 
most being of the opinion that the virginity is altogether lost 
when this membrane is fractured and destroyed by violence; 
when it is found perfect and entire, however, no penetration 
has been effected; and in the opinion of some learned physicians 
there is neither hymen nor expanded skin which con


1 Attributed to George IV (Translator). 

tains blood in it, which some people think, flows from the 
ruptured membrane at the first time of sexual intercourse. 

Now this claustrum virginale, or flower, is composed of 
four little buds like myrtle berries, which are full and plump 
in virgins, but hang loose and flag in women; and these are 
placed in the four angles of the sinus pudoris, joined together 
by little membranes and ligatures, like fibres, each of them 
situated in the testicles, or spaces between each bud, with 
which, in a manner, they are proportionately distended, and 
when once this membrane is lacerated, it denotes 
Devirgination. Thus many ignorant people, finding their 
wives defective in this respect on the first night, have immediately 
suspected their chastity, concluding that another man 
had been there before them, when indeed, such a rupture 
may happen in several ways accidentally, as well as by sexual 
intercourse, viz. by violent straining, coughing, or sneezing, 
the stoppage of the urine, etc., so that the entireness or the 
fracture of that which is commonly taken for a woman’s virginity 
or maidenhead, is no absolute sign of immorality, 
though it is more frequently broken by copulation than by 

37 



The Works of Aristotle 

any other means.2 

And now to say something of the change of the sexes in 
the womb. The genital parts of the sexes are so unlike each 
other in substance, composition, situation, figure, action and 
use that nothing is more unlike to each other than they are, 
and the more, all parts of the body (the breasts excepted, 
which in women swell, because Nature ordained them for 
suckling the infant) have an exact resemblance to each other, 
so much the more do the genital parts of one sex differ, when 
compared with the other, and if they be thus different in 

2 A young man was once tried at Rutland Assizes for violating 
a virgin, and after close questioning, the girl swearing 
positively in the matter, and naming the time, place and 
manner of the action, it was resolved that she should be examined 
by a skilful surgeon and two midwives, who were to 
report on oath, which they did, and declared that the membranes 
were intact and unlacerated, and that, in their opinion, 
her body had not been penetrated. This had its due effect 
upon the jury, and they acquitted the prisoner, and the 
girl afterwards confessed that she swore it against him out of 
revenge, as he had promised to marry her, and had afterwards 
declined. 

form, how much more are they so in their use. 

The venereal feeling also proceeds from different causes; 
in men from the desire of emission, and in women from the 
desire of reception. All these things, then, considered I cannot 
but wonder, he adds, how any one can imagine that the 
female genital organs can be changed into the male organ, 
since the sexes can be distinguished only by those parts, nor 
can I well impute the reason for this vulgar error to anything 
but the mistake of inexpert midwives, who have been deceived 
by the faulty conformation of those parts, which in 
some males may have happened to have such small protrusions 
that they could not be seen, as appears by the example 
of a child who was christened in Paris under the name of 
Ivan, as a girl, and who afterwards turned out to be a boy, 
and on the other hand, the excessive tension of the clytoris 
in newly-born female infants may have occasioned similar 
mistakes. Thus far Pliny in the negative, and notwithstanding 
what he has said, there are others, such as Galen, who 
assert the affirmative. “A man,” he says, “is different from a 
woman, only by having his genitals outside his body, whereas 
a woman has them inside her.” And this is certain, that if 

38 



The Works of Aristotle 

Nature having formed a male should convert him into a female, 
she has nothing else to do but to turn his genitals inward, 
and again to turn a woman into a man by a contrary 
operation. This, however, is to be understood of the child 
whilst it is in the womb and not yet perfectly formed, for 
Nature has often made a female child, and it has remained 
so for a month or two, in its mother’s womb; but afterwards 
the heat greatly increasing in the genital organs, they have 
protruded and the child has become a male, but nevertheless 
retained some things which do not befit the masculine sex, 
such as female gestures and movements, a high voice, and a 
more effeminate temper than is usual with men; whilst, on 
the other hand, the genitals have become inverted through 
cold humours, but yet the person retained a masculine air, 
both in voice and gesture. Now, though both these opinions 
are supported by several reasons, yet I think the latter are 
nearer the truth, for there is not that vast difference between 
the genitals of the two sexes as Pliny asserts; for a woman 
has, in a way, the same _pudenda_ as a man, though they do 
not appear outwardly, but are inverted for the convenience 
of generation; one being solid and the other porous, and 

that the principal reason for changing sexes is, and must be 
attributed to heat or cold, which operates according to its 
greater or lesser force. 

39 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER XI 


Directions and Cautions for Midwives; and, first, what ought 
to be the qualifications of a midwife. 

A MIDWIFE who wishes to acquit herself well in her employment, 
ought certainly not to enter upon it rashly or 
unadvisedly, but with all imaginable caution, remembering 
that she is responsible for any mischief which may happen 
through her ignorance or neglect. None, therefore, should 
undertake that duty merely because of their age or because 
they themselves have had many children, for, in such, generally, 
many things will be found wanting, which she should 
possess. She ought to be neither too old nor too young, neither 
very fat, nor so thin, as to be weak, but in a good habit 
of body; not subject to illness, fears, nor sudden frights; well-
made and neat in her attire, her hands small and smooth, 
her nails kept well-trimmed and without any rings on her 
fingers whilst she is engaged in her work, nor anything upon 
her wrists that may obstruct her. And to these ought to be 
added activity, and a due amount of strength, with much 

caution and diligence, nor should she be given to drowsiness 
or impatience. 

She should be polite and affable in her manners, sober and 
chaste, not given to passion, liberal and compassionate towards 
the poor, and not greedy of gain when she attends the 
rich. She should have a cheerful and pleasant temper, so that 
she may be the more easily able to comfort her patients during 
labour. She must never be in a hurry, though her business 
may call her to some other case, lest she should thereby 
endanger the mother or the child. 

She ought to be wary, prudent, and intelligent, but above 
all, she ought to be possessed by the fear of God, which will 
give her both “knowledge and discretion,” as the wise man 
says. 

40 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER XII 

Further Directions to Midwives, teaching them what they 
ought to do, and what to avoid. 

SINCE THE DUTIES of a midwife have such a great influence on 
the well-doing or the contrary of both women and children, 
in the first place, she must be diligent in gaining all such knowledge 
as may be useful to her in her practice, and never to think 
herself so perfect, but that it may be possible for her to add to 
her knowledge by study and experience. She should, however, 
never try any experiments unless she has tried them, or knows 
that they can do no harm; practising them neither upon rich 
nor poor, but freely saying what she knows, and never prescribing 
any medicines which will procure abortion, even 
though requested; for this is wicked in the highest degree, and 
may be termed murder. If she be sent for to people whom she 
does not know, let her be very cautious before she goes, lest by 
attending an infectious woman, she runs the danger of injuring 
others, as sometimes happens. Neither must she make her 
dwelling a receiving-house for big-bellied women to discharge 

their load, lest it get her a bad name and she by such means 
loses her practice. 

In attending on women, if the birth happens to be difficult, 
she must not seem to be anxious, but must cheer the woman 
up and do all she can to make her labour easy. She will find 
full directions for this, in the second part of this book. 

She must never think of anything but doing well, seeing 
that everything that is required is in readiness, both for the 
woman and for receiving the child, and above all, let her 
keep the woman from becoming unruly when her pains come 
on, lest she endanger her own life, and the child’s as well. 

She must also take care not to be hurried over her business 
but wait God’s time for the birth, and she must by no means 
allow herself to be upset by fear, even if things should not go 
well, lest that should make her incapable of rendering that 
assistance which the woman in labour stands in need of, for 
where there is the most apparent danger, there the most care 
and prudence are required to set things right. 

And now, because she can never be a skilful midwife who 
knows nothing but what is to be seen outwardly, I do not 
think it will be amiss but rather very necessary, modestly to 

41 



The Works of Aristotle 

describe the generative parts of women as they have been 
anatomised by learned men, and to show the use of such 
vessels as contribute to generation. 

CHAPTER XIII 


The External, and Internal Organs of Generation in Women. 

IF IT WERE NOT FOR the public benefit, especially for that of 
the professors and practitioners of the art of midwifery, I 
would refrain from treating the secrets of Nature, because 
they may be turned to ridicule by lascivious and lewd people. 
But as it is absolutely necessary that they should be known 
for the public good, I will not omit them because some may 
make a wrong use of them. Those parts which can be seen at 
the lowest part of the stomach are the fissure magna, or the 
great cleft, with its labia or lips, the Mons Veneris, or Mountain 
of Venus, and the hair. These together are called the 
pudenda, or things to be ashamed of because when they are 
exposed they cause a woman pudor, or shame. The fissure 
magna reaches from the lower part of the os pubis, to within 
an inch of the anus, but it is less and closer in virgins than in 
those who have borne children, and has two lips, which grow 
thicker and fuller towards the pubis, and meeting on the 
middle of the os pubis, form that rising hill which is called 

42 



The Works of Aristotle 

the _Mons Veneris_, or the Hill of Venus. 

Next come the Nymphae and the Clitoris, the former of 
which is a membrany and moist substance, spongy, soft and 
partly fleshy, of a red colour and in the shape of two wings, 
which are joined at an acute angle at their base, producing a 
fleshy substance there which covers the clitoris, and sometimes 
they extend so far, that an incision is required to make 
room for a man’s instrument of generation. 

The Clitoris is a substance in the upper part of the division 
where the two wings meet, and the seat of venereal pleasure, 
being like a man’s penis in situation, substance, composition 
and power of erection, growing sometimes to the length of 
two inches out of the body, but that never happens except 
through extreme lustfulness or some extraordinary accident. 
This clitoris consists of two spongy and skinny bodies, containing 
a distinct original from the os pubis, its tip being covered 
with a tender skin, having a hole or passage like a man’s 
yard or penis, although not quite through, in which alone, 
and in its size it differs from it. 

The next things are the fleshy knobs of the great neck of 
the womb, and these knobs are behind the wings and are 

four in number, resembling myrtle berries, and being placed 
quadrangularly one against the other, and here the orifice of 
the bladder is inserted, which opens into the fissures, to evacuate 
the urine, and one of these knobs is placed before it, and 
closes up the passage in order to secure it from cold, or any 
suchlike inconvenience. 

The lips of the womb, which appear next, disclose its neck, 
if they are separated, and two things may be observed in 
them, which are the neck itself and the hymen, or more properly, 
the claustrum virginale, of which I have spoken before. 
By the neck of the womb we must understand the channel 
that lies between the above-mentioned knobs and the inner 
bone of the womb, which receives the penis like a sheath, 
and so that it may be more easily dilated by the pleasure of 
procreation, the substance is sinewy and a little spongy. There 
are several folds or pleats in this cavity, made by tunicles, 
which are wrinkled like a full blown rose. In virgins they 
appear plainly, but in women who are used to copulation 
they disappear, so that the inner side of the neck of the womb 
appears smooth, but in old women it is more hard and gristly. 
But though this channel is sometimes crooked and sinks 

43 



The Works of Aristotle 

down yet at the times of copulation, labour, or of the monthly 
flow, it is erected or distended, which overtension occasions 
the pain in childbirth. 

The hymen, or claustrum virginale, is that which closes the 
neck of the womb, and is broken by the first act of copulation; 
its use being rather to check the undue menstrual flow 
in virgins, rather than to serve any other purpose, and usually 
when it is broken, either by copulation, or by any other 
means, a small quantity of blood flows from it, attended with 
some little pain. From this some observe that between the 
folds of the two tunicles, which constitute the neck of the 
womb there are many veins and arteries running along, and 
arising from, the vessels on both sides of the thighs, and so 
passing into the neck of the womb, being very large; and the 
reason for this is, that the neck of the bladder requires to be 
filled with great vigour, so as to be dilated, in order that it 
may lay hold of the penis better; for great heat is required in 
such motions, and that becomes more intense by the act of 
friction, and consumes a considerable amount of moisture, 
for supplying which large vessels are absolutely necessary. 

Another cause of the largeness of the vessels is, that menses 

make their way through them, which often occasions pregnant 
women to continue menstruating: for though the womb 
be shut up, yet the passages in the neck of the womb through 
which these vessels pass, are open. In this case, we may further 
observe, that as soon as the pudenda are penetrated, there 
appear two little pits or holes which contain a secretion, which 
is expelled during copulation, and gives the woman great 
pleasure. 

44 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER XIV 


A description of the Fabric of the Womb, the preparing Vessels 
and Testicles in Women. Also of the Different and Ejaculatory 
Vessels. 

THE WOMB is joined to its neck in the lower part of the Hypogastrium 
where the hips are the widest and broadest, as they 
are greater and broader there than those of men, and it is 
placed between the bladder and the straight gut, which keeps 
it from swaying, and yet gives it freedom to stretch and dilate, 
and again to contract, as nature requires. Its shape is 
somewhat round and not unlike a gourd, growing smaller 
and more acute towards one end, being knit together by its 
own ligaments; its neck likewise is joined by its own substance 
and by certain membranes that fasten into the os sacrum 
and the share-bone. Its size varies much in different women, 
and the difference is especially great between those who have 
borne children and those who have had none. Its substance 
exceeds a thumb’s breadth in thickness, and so far from decreasing 
conception, it rather increases; and in order to 

strengthen it it is interwoven with fibres which cross it from 
side to side, some of which are straight and some winding, 
and its proper vessels are veins, arteries and nerves. Amongst 
these there are two small veins which pass into the womb 
from the spermatic vessels, and two larger ones from the neck: 
the mouth of these veins pierces as far as the inward cavity. 

The womb has two arteries on both sides of the spermatic 
vessels and the hypogastric, which accompany the veins; and 
besides these, there are several little nerves in the form of a 
net, which extend throughout it, from the bottom of the 
pudenda; their chief function is sensibility and pleasure, as 
they move in sympathy between the head and the womb. 

It may be further noted that the womb is occasionally moveable 
by means of the two ligaments that hang on either side 
of it, and often rises and falls. The neck of the womb is extremely 
sensitive, so that if it be at any time out of order 
through over fatness, moisture or relaxation, it thereby becomes 
subject to barrenness. With pregnant women, a glutinous 
matter is often found at the entrance to the womb so as 
to facilitate the birth; for at the time of delivery, the mouth 
of the womb is opened as wide as the size of the child re


45 



The Works of Aristotle 

quires, and dilates equally from top to bottom. 

The spermatic vessels in women, consist of two veins and 
two arteries, which differ from those of men only in size and 
the manner of their insertion; for the number of veins and 
arteries is the same as in men, the right vein issuing from the 
trunk of the hollow vein descending and besides them there 
are two arteries, which flow from the aorta. 

These vessels are narrower and shorter in women than in 
men; but it must be noticed that they are more intertwined 
and contorted than in men, and shrink together by reason of 
their shortness that they may, by their looseness, be better 
stretched out when necessary: and these vessels in women 
are carried in an oblique direction through the lesser bowels 
and testicles but are divided into two branches half way. The 
larger goes to the stones and forms a winding body, and 
wonderfully inoculates the lesser branches where it disperses 
itself, and especially at the higher part of the bottom of the 
womb, for its nourishment, and that part of the courses may 
pass through the vessels; and seeing that women’s testicles 
are situated near the womb, for that cause those vessels do 
not fall from the peritoneum, nor do they make so much 

passage as in men, as they do not extend to the share-bone. 

The stones of woman, commonly called testicles, do not 
perform the same function as in men, for they are altogether 
different in position, size, temperature, substance, form and 
covering. They are situated in the hollow of the muscles of 
the loins, so that, by contracting greater heat, they may be 
more fruitful, their office being to contain the ova or eggs, 
one of which, being impregnated by the man’s seed engenders 
the child. They are, however, different from those of the 
male in shape, because they are smaller and flatter at each 
end, and not so round or oval; the external superficies is also 
more unequal, and has the appearance of a number of knobs 
or kernels mixed together. 

There is a difference, also, in the substance, as they are 
much softer and more pliable, and not nearly so compact. 
Their size and temperature are also different for they are much 
colder and smaller than in men, and their covering or enclosure 
is likewise quite different; for as men’s are wrapped in 
several covers, because they are very pendulous and would 
be easily injured unless they were so protected by nature, so 
women’s stones, being internal and thus less subject to being 

46 



The Works of Aristotle 

hurt, are covered by only one membrane, and are likewise 
half covered by the peritoneum. 

The ejaculatory vessels are two small passages, one on either 
side, which do not differ in any respect from the spermatic 
veins in substance. They rise in one place from the 
bottom of the womb, and do not reach from their other 
extremity either to the stones or to any other part, but are 
shut up and impassable, and adhere to the womb as the colon 
does to the blind gut, and winding half way about; and 
though the testicles are not close to them and do not touch 
them, yet they are fastened to them by certain membranes 
which resemble the wing of a bat, through which certain 
veins and arteries passing from the end of the testicles may 
be said to have their passages going from the corners of the 
womb to the testicles, and these ligaments in women are the 
cremasters3 in men, of which I shall speak more fully when I 
come to describe the male parts of generation. 

3 Muscles by which the testicles are drawn up. 

CHAPTER XV 


A Description of the Use and Action of the several Generative 
Parts in Women. 

THE EXTERNAL PARTS, commonly called the pudenda, are designed 
to cover the great orifice and to receive the man’s penis 
or yard in the act of sexual intercourse, and to give passage 
to the child and to the urine. The use of the wings and 
knobs, like myrtle berries, is for the security of the internal 
parts, closing the orifice and neck of the bladder and by their 
swelling up, to cause titillation and pleasure in those parts, 
and also to obstruct the involuntary passage of the urine. 

The action of the clitoris in women is similar to that of the 
penis in men, viz., erection; and its lower end is the glans of 
the penis, and has the same name. And as the glans of man 
are the seat of the greatest pleasure in copulation, so is this in 
the woman. 

The action and use of the neck on the womb is the same as 
that of the penis, viz., erection, brought about in different 
ways: first, in copulation it becomes erect and made straight 

47 



The Works of Aristotle 

for the passage of the penis into the womb; secondly, whilst 
the passage is filled with the vital blood, it becomes narrower 
for embracing the penis; and the uses of this erection are 
twofold:—first, because if the neck of the womb were not 
erected, the man’s yard could find no proper passage to the 
womb, and, secondly, it hinders any damage or injury that 
might ensue through the violent striking of the penis during 
the act of copulation. 

The use of the veins that pass through the neck of the 
womb, is to replenish it with blood and vigour, that so, as 
the moisture is consumed by the heat engendered by sexual 
intercourse, it may be renewed by those vessels; but their 
chief business is to convey nutriment to the womb. 

The womb has many properties belonging to it: first, the 
retention of the impregnated egg, and this is conception, 
properly so called; secondly, to cherish and nourish it, until 
Nature has fully formed the child, and brought it to perfection, 
and then it operates strongly in expelling the child, 
when the time of its remaining has expired, becoming dilated 
in an extraordinary manner and so perfectly removed 
from the senses that they cannot injuriously affect it, retain


ing within itself a power and strength to eject the foetus, 
unless it be rendered deficient by any accident; and in such a 
case remedies must be applied by skilful hands to strengthen 
it, and enable it to perform its functions; directions for which 
will be given in the second book. 

The use of the preparing vessels is this; the arteries convey 
the blood to the testicles; some part of it is absorbed in nourishing 
them, and in the production of these little bladders 
(which resemble eggs in every particular), through which the 
vasa preparantia run, and which are absorbed in them; and 
the function of the veins is to bring back whatever blood remains 
from the above mentioned use. The vessels of this kind 
are much shorter in women than in men, because they are 
nearer to the testicles; this defect is, however, made good by 
the many intricate windings to which those vessels are subject; 
for they divide themselves into two branches of different 
size in the middle and the larger one passes to the testicles. 

The stones in women are very useful, for where they are 
defective, the work of generation is at an end. For though 
those bladders which are on the outer surface contain no 
seed, as the followers of Galen and Hippocrates wrongly be


48 



The Works of Aristotle 

lieved, yet they contain several eggs, generally twenty in each 
testicle; one of which being impregnated by the animated 
part of the man’s seed in the act of copulation, descends 
through the oviducts into the womb, and thus in due course 
of time becomes a living child. 

CHAPTER XVI 

Of the Organs of Generation in Man. 

HAVING GIVEN A DESCRIPTION of the organs of generation in 
women, with the anatomy of the fabric of the womb, I shall 
now, in order to finish the first part of this treatise, describe 
the organs of generation in men, and how they are fitted for 
the use for which Nature intended them. 

The instrument of generation in men (commonly called 
the yard, in Latin, penis, from pendo, to hang, because it 
hangs outside the belly), is an organic part which consists of 
skin, tendons, veins, arteries, sinews and great ligaments; and 
is long and round, and on the upper side flattish, seated under 
the os pubis, and ordained by Nature partly for the evacuation 
of urine, and partly for conveying the seed into the 
womb; for which purpose it is full of small pores, through 
which the seed passes into it, through the vesicula seminalis,4 
and discharges the urine when they make water; besides the 
common parts, viz., the two nervous bodies, the septum, the 

4 Seminal vesicle. 

49 



The Works of Aristotle 

urethra, the glans, four muscles and the vessels. The nervous 
bodies (so called) are surrounded with a thick white, penetrable 
membrane, but their inner substance is spongy, and 
consists chiefly of veins, arteries, and nervous fibres, interwoven 
like a net. And when the nerves are filled with animal 
vigour and the arteries with hot, eager blood, the penis becomes 
distended and erect; also the neck of the vesicula 
urinalis,5 but when the influx of blood ceases, and when it is 
absorbed by the veins, the penis becomes limp and flabby. 
Below those nervous bodies is the urethra, and whenever 
they swell, it swells also. The penis has four muscles; two 
shorter ones springing from the Cox endix and which serve 
for erection, and on that account they are called erectores; 
two larger, coming from sphincters ani, which serve to dilate 
the urethra so as to discharge the semen, and these are called 
dilatantes, or wideners. At the end of the penis is the glans, 
covered with a very thin membrane, by means of which, and 
of its nervous substance, it becomes most extremely sensitive, 
and is the principal seat of pleasure in copulation. The 
outer covering of the glans is called the preputium (foreskin), 

5 Urinary vesicle. 

which the Jews cut off in circumcision, and it is fastened by 
the lower part of it to the glans. The penis is also provided 
with veins, arteries and nerves. 

The testiculi, stones or testicles (so called because they testify 
one to be a man), turn the blood, which is brought to 
them by the spermatic arteries into seed. They have two sorts 
of covering, common and proper; there are two of the common, 
which enfold both the testes. The outer common coat, 
consists of the cuticula, or true skin, and is called the scrotum, 
and hangs from the abdomen like a purse; the inner is 
the membrana carnosa. There are also two proper coats—the 
outer called cliotrodes, or virginales; the inner albugidia; in 
the outer the cremaster is inserted. The epididemes, or prostatae 
are fixed to the upper part of the testes, and from them spring 
the vasa deferentia, or ejaculatoria, which deposit the seed 
into the vesicule seminales when they come near the neck of 
the bladder. There are two of these vesiculae, each like a bunch 
of grapes, which emit the seed into the urethra in the act of 
copulation. Near them are the prostatae, about the size of a 
walnut, and joined to the neck of the bladder. Medical writers 
do not agree about the use of them, but most are of the 

50 



The Works of Aristotle 

opinion that they produce an oily and sloppy discharge to 
besmear the urethra so as to defend it against the pungency 
of the seed and urine. But the vessels which convey the blood 
to the testes, from which the seed is made, are the arteriae 
spermaticae and there are two of them also. There are likewise 
two veins, which carry off the remaining blood, and 
which are called venae spermaticae. 

CHAPTER XVII 


A word of Advice to both Sexes, consisting of several Directions 
with regard to Copulation. 

AS NATURE has a mutual desire for copulation in every creature, 
for the increase and propagation of its kind, and more 
especially in man, the lord of creation and the masterpiece 
of Nature, in order that such a noble piece of divine workmanship 
should not perish, something ought to be said concerning 
it, it being the foundation of everything that we have 
hitherto been treating of, since without copulation there can 
be no generation. Seeing, therefore, so much depends upon 
it, I have thought it necessary, before concluding the first 
book, to give such directions to both sexes, for the performance 
of that act, as may appear efficacious to the end for 
which nature designed it, but it will be done with such caution 
as not to offend the chastest ear, nor to put the fair sex 
to the blush when they read it. 

In the first place, then, when a married couple from the 
desire of having children are about to make use of those means 

51 



The Works of Aristotle 

that Nature has provided for that purpose, it is well to stimulate 
the body with generous restoratives, that it may be active 
and vigorous. And the imagination should be charmed 
with sweet music, and if all care and thoughts of business be 
drowned in a glass of rosy wine, so that their spirit may be 
raised to the highest pitch of ardour, it would be as well, for 
troubles, cares or sadness are enemies to the pleasures of Venus. 
And if the woman should conceive when sexual intercourse 
takes place at such times of disturbance, it would have 
a bad effect upon the child. But though generous restoratives 
may be employed for invigorating nature, yet all excess should 
be carefully avoided, for it will check the briskness of the 
spirits and make them dull and languid, and as it also interferes 
with digestion, it must necessarily be an enemy to copulation; 
for it is food taken moderately and that is well digested, 
which enables a man to perform the dictates of Nature 
with vigour and activity, and it is also necessary, that in 
their mutual embraces they meet each other with equal 
ardour, for, if not, the woman either will not conceive, or 
else the child may be weak bodily, or mentally defective. I, 
therefore, advise them to excite their desires mutually before 

they begin their conjugal intercourse, and when they have 
done what nature requires, a man must be careful not to 
withdraw himself from his wife’s arms too soon, lest some 
sudden cold should strike into the womb and occasion miscarriage, 
and so deprive them of the fruits of their labour. 

And when the man has withdrawn himself after a suitable 
time, the woman should quietly go to rest, with all calmness 
and composure of mind, free from all anxious and disturbing 
thoughts, or any other mental worry. And she must, as 
far as possible, avoid turning over from the side on which 
she was first lying, and also keep from coughing and sneezing, 
because as it violently shakes the body, it is a great enemy 
to conception. 

52 



The Works of Aristotle 

A PRIVATE LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE 
FEMALE SEX 


PART II 


CHAPTER I 


Treating of the several Maladies incident to the womb, with 
proper remedies for the cure of each. 

THE WOMB is placed in the hypogastrium, or lower part of the 
body, in the cavity called the pelvis, having the straight gut 
on one side to protect it against the hardness of the backbone, 
and the bladder on the other side to protect it against 
blows. Its form or shape is like a virile member, with this 
exception, that the man’s is outside, and the woman’s inside. 

It is divided into the neck and body. The neck consists of a 
hard fleshy substance, much like cartilage, and at the end of 
it there is a membrane placed transversely, which is called 
the hymen. Near the neck there is a prominent pinnacle, 
which is called the door of the womb, because it preserves 

the matrix from cold and dust. The Greeks called it clitoris, 
and the Latins praeputium muliebre, because the Roman 
women abused these parts to satisfy their mutual unlawful 
lusts, as St. Paul says, Romans 1. 26. 

The body of the womb is where the child is conceived, 
and this is not altogether round, but dilates itself into two 
angles; the outward part is full of sinews, which are the cause 
of its movements, but inside it is fleshy. It is wrongly said, 
that in the cavity of the womb there are seven divided cells 
or receptacles for the male seed, but anatomists know that 
there are only two, and also that those two are not divided 
by a partition, but only by a line or suture running through 
the middle of it. 

At the bottom of the cavity there are little holes called 
cotyledones, which are the ends of certain veins or arteries, 
and serve breeding women to convey nourishment to the 
child, which is received by the umbilical and other veins, to 
carry the courses to the matrix. 

As to menstruation, it is defined as a monthly flow of bad 
and useless blood, and of the super-abundance of it, for it is 
an excrement in quality, though it is pure and incorrupt, like 

53 



The Works of Aristotle 

the blood in the veins. And that the menstruous blood is 
pure in itself, and of the same quality as that in the veins, is 
proved in two ways.—First, from the final object of the blood, 
which is the propagation and preservation of mankind, that 
man might be conceived; and that, being begotten, he might 
be comforted and preserved both in and out of the womb, 
and all allow that it is true that a child in the matrix is nourished 
by the blood. And it is true that when it is out of it, it 
is nourished by the same; for the milk is nothing but the 
menstruous blood made white in the breast. Secondly, it is 
proved to be true by the way it is produced, as it is the superfluity 
of the last aliment of the fleshy parts. 

The natural end of man and woman’s being is to propagate. 
Now, in the act of conception one must be an active 
agent and the other passive, for if both were similarly constituted, 
they could not propagate. Man, therefore, is hot and 
dry, whilst woman is cold and moist: he is the agent, and she 
the passive or weaker vessel, that she may be subject to the 
office of the man. It is necessary that woman should be of a 
cold constitution, because a redundancy of Nature for the 
infant that depends on her is required of her; for otherwise 

there would be no surplus of nourishment for the child, but 
no more than the mother requires, and the infant would 
weaken the mother, and like as in the viper, the birth of the 
infant would be the death of the parent. 

The monthly purgations continue from the fifteenth to 
the forty-sixth or fiftieth year; but a suppression often occurs, 
which is either natural or morbid: the courses are suppressed 
naturally during pregnancy, and whilst the woman 
is suckling. The morbid suppression remains to be spoken 
of. 

54 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER II 

Of the Retention of the Courses. 

THE SUPPRESSION of the menstrual periods, is an interruption 
of that accustomed evacuation of blood, which comes from 
the matrix every month, and the part affected is the womb. 

CAUSE 

The cause of this suppression is either external or internal. 
The external cause may be heat or dryness of air, want of 
sleep, too much work, violent exercise, etc., whereby the substance 
is so consumed, and the body so exhausted that nothing 
is left over to be got rid of, as is recorded of the Amazons 
who, being active and constantly in motion, had their courses 
very little, if at all. Or it may be brought about by cold which 
is very frequent, as it vitiates and thickens the blood, and 
binds up the passages, so that it cannot flow out. 

The internal cause is either instrumental or material; in 

the womb or in the blood. In the womb, it may be in various 
ways; by humours, and abscesses and ulcers, by the narrowness 
of the veins and passages, or by the adipose membrane 
in fat bodies, pressing on the neck of the matrix, but then 
they must have hernia, zirthilis, for in men the membrane 
does not reach so low; by too much cold or heat, the one 
vitiating the action, and the other consuming the matter 
through the wrong formation of the uterine parts; by the 
neck of the womb being turned aside, and sometimes, though 
rarely, by a membrane or excrescence of the flesh growing at 
the mouth or neck of the womb. The blood may be in fault 
in two ways, in quantity and in quality; in quantity, when it 
is so consumed that no surplus is left over, as in viragoes or 
virile women, who, through their heat and natural strength, 
consume it all in their last nourishment; as Hippocrates writes 
of Prethusa, for when her husband praised her overmuch, 
her courses were suppressed, her voice changed and she got a 
beard with a manly face. But I think, rather that these must 
be Gynophagi, or woman-eaters, rather than women-breeders, 
because they consume one of the principles of generation, 
which gives a being to the world, viz., the menstruous 

55 



The Works of Aristotle 

blood. The blood may likewise be lost, and the courses 
checked by nosebleeding, by bleeding piles, by dysentery, 
commonly called the bloody flux, by many other discharges, 
and by chronic diseases. Secondly, the matter may be vitiated 
in quality, and if it be sanguineous, sluggish, bilious or 
melancholy, and any of these will cause an obstruction in 
the veins. 

SIGNS 

Signs which manifest the disease are pains in the head, neck, 
back and loins; weariness of the whole body (but especially 
of the hips and legs, because the womb is near those parts); 
palpitation of the heart. The following are particular signs:— 
If the suppression arises from a cold, the woman becomes 
heavy, sluggish, pale and has a slow pulse; Venus’ combats 
are neglected, the urine is thick, the blood becomes watery 
and great in quantity, and the bowels become constipated. If 
it arises from heat, the signs are just the opposite. If the retention 
be natural and arises from conception, this may be 

known by drinking hydromel, i.e., water and honey, after 
supper, before going to bed, by the effect which it has; for if 
after taking it, she feels a heating pain about the navel and 
the lower parts of the abdomen, it is a sign that she has conceived, 
and that the suppression is natural. 

PROGNOSTICS 

The whole body is affected by any disorder of the womb, and 
especially the heart, the liver and the brain, and there is a singular 
sympathy between the womb and those three organs. 
Firstly, the womb communicates with the heart by the mediation 
of those arteries which come from the aorta. Hence, when 
menstruation is suppressed, fainting, swooning, a very low 
pulse, and shortness of breath will ensue. Secondly, it communicates 
with the liver by the veins derived from the hollow 
vein. Obstructions, jaundice, dropsy, induration of the spleen 
will follow. Thirdly, it communicates with the brain by the 
nerves and membranes of the back; hence arise epilepsy, madness, 
fits of melancholy, pains in the back of the head, unac


56 



The Works of Aristotle 

countable fears and inability to speak. I may, therefore, well 
agree with Hippocrates that if menstruation be suppressed, 
many dangerous diseases will follow. 

CURE 

In the cure of this, and of all the other following cases, I shall 
observe the following order:—The cures will be taken from 
surgical, pharmaceutical and diuretical means. The suppression 
has a plethoric effect, and must be removed by the evacuation; 
therefore we begin with bleeding. In the middle of the 
menstrual period, open the liver vein, and two days before, 
open the saphena in both feet; if the repletion is not very 
great apply cupping glasses to the legs and thighs, although 
there may be no hope of removing the suppression. As in 
some women, the cotyledones are so closed up that nothing 
but copulation will open them, yet it will be well to relieve 
the woman as much as possible by opening the hemoroid 
veins by applying a leech. After bleeding let the place be 
prepared and made flexible with syrup of stychas, calamint, 

betony, hyssop, mugwort, horehound, fumitary, maidenhair. 
Bathe the parts with camomiles, pennyroyal, savias, bay-
leaves, juniper-berries, rue, marjoram, feverfew. Take a handful 
each of nep, maidenhair, succory and betony leaves and 
make a decoction, and take three ounces of it, syrup of maidenhair, 
mugwort and succory, half an ounce of each. After 
she comes out of her bath, let her drink it off. Purge with Pill 
agaric, fleybany, corb, feriae. In this case, Galen recommends 
pilulae of caberica coloquintida; for, as they are good for purging 
the bad humours, so also they open the passages of the 
womb, and strengthen it by their aromatic qualities. 

If the stomach be over-loaded, let her take an emetic, yet 
such a one as may work both ways, lest if it only works upwards, 
it should check the humours too much. Take two 
drachms of trochisks of agaric, infuse this in two ounces of 
oxymel in which dissolve one scruple and a half of electuary 
dissarum, and half an ounce of benedic laxit. Take this as a 
purge. 

After the humour has been got rid of, proceed to more 
suitable and stronger remedies. Take a drachm and a half of 
trochisk of myrrh; ten grains of musk with the juice of 

57 



The Works of Aristotle 

smallage; make twelve pills and take six every morning, or 
after supper, on going to bed. Take half an ounce of cinnamon, 
two drachms each of smirutium, or rogos, valerin 
aristolochia; two scruples each of astrumone root and saffron; 
two drachms of spec. diambia; four scruples of trochisk 
of myrrh; two scruples tartari vitriolari; make half into a 
powder; make lozenges with mugwort water and sugar, and 
take one drachm of them every morning; or mix a drachm 
of the powder with one drachm of sugar, and take it in white 
wine. Take two drachms each of prepared steel and spec. 
hair; one scruple each of borax and spec. of myrrh, with savine 
juice; make it up into eighty-eight lozenges and take three 
every other day before dinner. Take one scruple of castor, 
half a drachm of wild carrot seed with syrup of mugwort, 
and make four pills, take them in the morning fasting, for 
three days following, before the usual time of purging. Take 
five drachms each of agaric, aristolochia, and juice of horehound; 
six drachma each of rhubarb, spikenard, aniseed, 
guidanum, asafoetida, mallow-root, gentian, of the three 
peppers and of liquorice: make an electuary with honey, and 
take three drachms for a dose. For phlegmatic constitutions 

nothing can be better than the decoction of guaiacum wood 
with a little disclaim, taken fasting in the morning, for twelve 
days consecutively, without producing sweating. 

Treat the lower parts of the body to suffumigating, pessaries, 
ointments and injections; for fumigating use cinnamon, 
nutmeg, the berries of the bay tree, mugwort, galbanum, 
molanthium, amber, etc. Make pessaries of figs and 
the bruised leaves of dog’s mercury, rolled up in lint, and if a 
stronger one is required, make one of myrrh, opopanax, 
ammoniac, galbanum, sagepanum, mithridate, agaric, 
coloquintida, tec. Make injections of a decoction of origane 
mugwort, dog’s mercury, betony, and eggs; inject into the 
womb with a female syringe. Take half an ounce each of oil 
of almonds, lilies, capers, camomiles; two drachms each of 
laudanum and oil of myrrh; make a salve with wax, with 
which anoint the place; make injections of fenugreek, 
camomiles, melilot, dill, marjoram, pennyroyal, feverfew, 
juniper berries and calamint; but if the suppression arises 
from a lack of matter, then the courses ought not to be 
brought on until the spirits be raised and the amount of blood 
increased; or if it arises from affections of the womb itself, as 

58 



The Works of Aristotle 

dropsy or inflammation, then particular care must be used; 
but I will not lay stress on this here, but will mention the 
remedies in their order. 

If the retention comes from repletion or fullness, if the air 
be hot and dry, take moderate exercise before meals, and 
very light diet and drinks, and with your food take garden 
savory—thyme and origane, if it arises from emptiness and 
defect of matter: if the weather be moist and moderately 
hot, avoid exercise and late hours; let your food be nourishing 
and easy of digestion, such as raw eggs, lamb, chickens, 
almonds, milk and the like. 

CHAPTER III 

Of Excessive Menstruation 

THE LEARNED SAY, that truth is manifested by comparing contraries, 
and so, as I have above spoken of the suppression of 
menstruation, it is now necessary that I should treat of excessive 
menstruation, which is no less dangerous than the 
former. This immoderate monthly flow is defined as a sanguineous 
discharge, as it consists merely of blood, wherein it 
differs from the false courses or whites, of which I shall speak 
further on. Secondly, it is said to proceed from the womb; 
for there are two ways in which the blood issues forth; one 
by the internal veins of the body of the womb (and this is 
properly called the monthly flow), the other is by those veins 
which terminate in the neck of the matrix, which Aetius calls 
haemorrhoids of the womb. In quantity, Hippocrates said, it 
should be about eighteen ounces, and they should last about 
three days: and when the faculties of the body are weakened 
by their flow, we may take it that the discharge is inordinate. 
In bodies which abound in gross humours, this immoderate 

59 



The Works of Aristotle 

flow sometimes unburdens nature of her load and ought not 
to be checked without a physician’s advice. 

CAUSE 

The cause is either internal or external. The internal cause is 
threefold; in the substance, the instrument or the power. The 
matter, which is the blood, may be vitiated in two ways; 
first, by the heat of the constitution, climate or season, heating 
the blood, whereby the passages are dilated, and the power 
weakened so that it cannot retain the blood. Secondly, by 
falls, blows, violent motions, rupture of the veins, etc. The 
external cause may be the heat of the air, heavy burdens, 
unnatural childbirth, etc. 

SIGNS 

In this excessive flow the appetite is lessened, conception is 
checked and all the functions weakened; the feet swell, the 

colour of the face changes, and the whole body is weakened. 
If the flow comes from the rupture of a vein, the body is sometimes 
cold, the blood flows out in streams, suddenly, and causes 
great pain. If it arises from heat, and the orifice of the vein is 
dilated, there is little or no pain, but yet the blood flows faster 
than it does when caused by erosion, but not so fast as it does 
in a rupture. If caused by erosion, the woman feels a scalding 
of the passage, and it differs from the other two, in so much as 
it does not flow so quickly or so freely as they do. If it is caused 
by weakness of the womb, the woman feels a dislike for sexual 
intercourse. Lastly, if it proceeds from the defective quality of 
the blood let some of it drop into a cloth, and when it is dry, 
you may judge, of the quality by the colour. If it be passionate 
it will be yellow; if melancholy, it will be black, and if phlegmatic, 
it will be waterish and whitish. 

PROGNOSTICS 

If convulsions are joined to the flow, it is dangerous, because 
that intimates that the noble parts are affected, convulsions 

60 



The Works of Aristotle 

caused by emptiness are deadly. If they continue long, they 
will be very difficult to cure, and it was one of the miracles 
which our Saviour Christ wrought, to cure a woman of this 
disease of twelve years standing. 

To conclude, if the flow be excessive, many diseases will 
follow, which will be almost impossible to cure; the blood, 
being consumed together with the innate heat, either morbid, 
dropsical, or paralytical diseases will follow. 

CURE 

The cure consists in three particulars. First, in expelling and 
carrying away the blood. Secondly, in connecting and removing 
the fluxibility of the matter. Thirdly, in incorporating 
the veins and faculties. For the first, to get rid of the 
superfluous blood, open a vein in the arm, and draw off as 
much blood as the strength of the patient will allow; not all 
at one time, but at intervals, for by those means the spirits 
are less weakened, and the reaction so much the greater. 

Apply cupping glasses to the breasts and also over the liver, 

and to correct the flexibility of the matter, purgative means, 
moderated by astringents, may be employed. 

If it is caused by erosion, and salt phlegm, prepare with 
syrup of violets, wormwood, roses, citron peel, succory, etc. 
Then make the following purge:—mirabolans, half an ounce; 
trochisks of agaric, one drachm; make a decoction with the 
plantain-water, and add syrup of roses lax. three ounces, and 
make a draught. 

If caused by any mental excitement, prepare the body by 
syrup of roses, myrtles, sorrel and parsley, mixed with plantain-
water, knot-grass and endive. Then purge with the following 
draught:—Take one drachm each of the void of 
mirabolans, and rhubarb, cinnamon fifteen grains; infuse for 
a night in endive water; add to the strained water half an 
ounce of pulp of tamarinds and of cassia, and make a draught. 
If the blood be waterish as it is in dropsical subjects and 
flows out easily on account of its thinness, it will be a good 
plan to draw off the water by purging with agaric, elaterium 
and coloquintida. Sweating is also useful in this case, as by it 
the noxious matter is carried off, and the motion of the blood 
to other parts. To produce sweating, employ cardus water, 

61 



The Works of Aristotle 

and mithridate, or a decoction of guaiacum and sarsaparilla. 
Gum guaiacum is also a great producer of perspiration, and 
sarsaparilla pills, taken every night before going to bed are 
also highly to be recommended. If the blood pours out, without 
any evil quality in itself, then strengthening means only 
should be employed, which is a thing to be done in cases of 
inordinate discharge. 

Take one scruple of ol. ammoniac, one drachm of treacle, 
half an ounce of conserve of roses and make an electuary 
with syrup of myrtle, or if the discharge be of long standing 
take two drachms of matrix, one drachm of olilanum troch. 
de carbara, a scruple of balustium; make into a powder and 
form into pills with syrup of quinces, and take one before 
every meal. Take two scruples each of troch. dechambede, 
scoriaferri, coral and frankincense; pound these to a fine 
powder, and make into lozenges with sugar and plantain 
water. Asses’ dung is also approved of, whether taken inwardly 
with syrup of quinces or applied outwardly with steeled water. 
Galen by sending the juice of it into the womb by means 
of a syringe for four days consecutively, cured this immediate 
flow, which could not be checked in any other way. Let 

the patient take one scruple and a half of pilon in water before 
going to bed; make a fumigation for the womb of mastic, 
frankincense and burnt frogs, adding the hoof of a mule. 
Take an ounce each of the juice of knot-grass, comfoly and 
quinces; a drachm of camphor; dip a piece of silk or cotton 
into it and apply it to the place. Take half an ounce each of 
oil of mastic, myrtle, and quinces; a drachm each of fine 
bole and troch. decardas, and a sufficient quantity of dragon’s 
blood, make an ointment and apply it before and behind. 
Take an ounce and a half each of plantain, shepherd’s purse 
and red rose leaves; an ounce of dried mint, and three ounces 
of bean flour; boil all these in plantain water and make two 
plasters:—apply one before and one behind. If the blood 
flows from those veins which are terminated at the neck of 
the matrix, then it is not called an undue discharge of the 
menses, but haemorrhoids of the womb. The same remedy, 
however, will serve for both, only the instrumental cure will 
be a little different; for in uterine haemorrhoids, the ends of 
the veins hang over like teats, which must be removed by 
cutting, and then the veins closed with aloes, fine bole, burnt 
alum, myrrh, mastic, with comfoly-juice and knot grass, laid 

62 



The Works of Aristotle 

upon it like a plaster. 

The air should be cold and dry, and all motion of the body 
should be prohibited. Her diet should consist of pheasants, 
partridges, grouse, rabbits, calves’ feet, etc., and her drink 
should be mixed with the juice of pomegranates and quinces. 

CHAPTER IV 

Of the Weeping of the Womb 

THE WEEPING OF THE WOMB is an unnatural flow of blood, 
coming from it in drops, like tears, and causing violent pains 
in it, and occurring at no fixed period or time. By some it is 
supposed to be produced by the excessive flow of the courses, 
as they flow copiously and freely; this is continued, though 
only little at a time, and accompanied by great pain and difficulty 
of passing it, and on this account it is compared to 
the strangury. 

The cause is in the power, instrument or matter; in the 
power, on account of its being enfeebled so that it cannot 
expel the blood, and which, remaining there, makes that part 
of the womb grow hard, and distends the vessels, and from 
that, pains in the womb arise. In the instrument, from the 
narrowness of the passage. Lastly, it may be the matter of the 
blood which is at fault, and which may be in too great quantities; 
or the quality may be bad, so that it is thick and gross 
and cannot flow out as it ought to do, but only in drops. 

63 



The Works of Aristotle 

The signs will best be ascertained by the patient’s own account, 
but there will be pains in the head, stomach and back, 
with inflammation, difficulty of breathing and excoriation 
of the matrix. If the patient’s strength will permit it, first 
open a vein in the arm, rub the upper parts and let a cord be 
fastened tightly round the arm, so that the force of the blood 
may be carried backward; then apply such things as may 
relax the womb, and assuage the heat of the blood, as poultices 
made of bran, linseed, mallows, dog’s mercury and 
artiplex. If the blood be viscous and thick, add mugwort, 
calamint, dictain and betony to it, and let the patient take 
about the size of a nutmeg of Venic treacle, and syrup of 
mugwort every morning; make an injection of aloes, dog’s 
mercury, linseed, groundsel, mugwort, fenugreek, with sweet 
almond oil. 

Sometimes it is caused by wind, and then bleeding must 
not be had recourse to, but instead take one ounce of syrup 
of feverfew; half an ounce each of honey, syrup of roses, syrup 
of stachus; an ounce each of calamint water, mugwort, betony 
and hyssop, and make a julep. If the pain continues, use this 
purge:—Take a drachm of spec. Hitrae, half an ounce of 

diacatholicon, one ounce of syrup of roses and laxative, and 
make a draught with a decoction of mugwort and the four 
cordial flowers. If it proceeds from weakness, she must be 
strengthened, but if from grossness of blood, let the quality 
of it be altered, as I have shown in the preceding chapter. 
Lastly, if her bowels are confined, move them by an injection 
of a decoction of camomiles, betony, feverfew, mallows, 
linseed, juniper-berries, cumminseed, aniseed, melilot, and 
add to it half an ounce of diacatholicon; two drachms of 
hiera piera, an ounce each of honey and oil and a drachm 
and a half of sol. nitre. The patient must abstain from salt, 
acid and windy food. 

64 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER V 

The false Courses, or Whites 

FROM THE WOMB, not only the menstruous blood proceeds, 
but many evacuations, which were summed up by the ancients 
under the title of rhoos gunaikeios,6 which is the distillation 
of a variety of corrupt humours through the womb, 
which flow from the whole body or a part of it, varying both 
in courses and colour. 

CAUSE 

The cause is either promiscuously in the whole body, by a 
cacochymia; or weakness of it, or in some of its parts, as in 
the liver, which by a weakness of the blood producing powers, 
cause a production of corrupt blood, which then is reddish. 
Sometimes, when the fall is sluggish in its action, and 
does not get rid of those superfluities engendered in the liver, 

6 The female flowing. 

the matter is yellowish. Sometimes it is in the spleen when it 
does not cleanse the blood of the dregs and rejected particles, 
and then the matter which flows forth is blackish. It 
may also come from a cold in the head, or from any other 
decayed or corrupted member, but if the discharge be white, 
the cause lies either in the stomach or loins. In the stomach, 
by some crude substance there, and vitiated by grief, melancholy 
or some other mental disturbance; for otherwise, if 
the matter were only crude phlegm and noways corrupt, being 
taken into the liver it might be converted into the blood; for 
phlegm in the ventricle is called nourishment half digested; 
but being corrupt, though sent into the liver it cannot be 
turned into nutriment, for the second decoction in the stomach 
cannot correct that which the first corrupted; and therefore 
the liver sends it to the womb, which can neither digest 
nor reject it, and so it is voided out with the same colour 
which it had in the ventricle. The cause may also be in the 
veins being overheated whereby the spermatical matter flows 
out because of its thinness. The external causes may be moistness 
of the air, eating bad food, anger, grief, sloth, too much 
sleep, costiveness. 

65 



The Works of Aristotle 

The signs are bodily disturbances, shortness of breathing, 
and foul breath, a distaste for food, swollen eyes and feet, 
and low spirits; discharges of different colours, as red, black, 
green, yellow and white from the womb. It differs from the 
flowing of the courses and from too abundant menstruation, 
in so far as it keeps no certain period, and is of many 
colours, all of which spring from blood. 

If the flux be phlegmatic, it will last long and be hard to 
cure, but if sickness or diarrhoea supervene, it carries off the 
humour and cures the disease. If it is abundant it does not 
last so long, but it is more dangerous, for it will cause a cleft 
in the neck of the womb, and sometimes also an excoriation 
of the matrix; if melancholy, it must be dangerous and obstinate. 
The flux of the haemorrhoids, however, assists the cure. 

If the matter which flows out be reddish, open a vein in 
the arm; if not, apply ligatures to the arms and shoulders. 
Galen boasts that he cured the wife of Brutus, who was suffering 
from this disease, by rubbing the upper part with honey. 

If it is caused by the brain, take syrup of betony and marjoram. 
Give as a purgative Pill. coch. or Agaric; make nasalia 
of sage, or hyssop juice, betony, flagella, with one drop of oil 

of Elect. Dianth. Rosat. Diambrae, diamosci dulus, one drachm 
of each, and make lozenges to be taken every morning and 
evening. Auri Alexandrina, half a drachm at night on going 
to bed. If these things have no effect, try suffumigation and 
plasters, as they are prescribed above. 

If it arises from crudities of the stomach or from a cold, 
disordered liver, take a decoction of lignum sanctum every 
morning, purge with pill de agaric, de hermadact, de hiera, 
diacolinthis, foetid-agrigatio; take two drachms of elect. 
aromet-roses, one scruple each of dried citron peel, nutmeg, 
long pepper; one drachm of draglanga; half a scruple each of 
fantalum album, ling, aloes; six ounces of sugar, with mint 
water: make lozenges of it, and take them before meals. If 
there be repletion besides the rigidity of the liver, purging by 
means of an emetic is to be recommended, for which take 
three drachms of the electuary diasatu. Galen allows diuretical 
remedies, such as aqua petrofolma. 

If the discharge be angry, treat it with syrup of roses, violets, 
endive and succory; give a purge of mirabolans, manna, 
rhubarb, and cassia. Take two drachms of rhubarb, one of 
aniseed, and one scruple and a half of cinnamon; infuse them 

66 



The Works of Aristotle 

into six ounces of syrup of prunes, and add one ounce of 
strained manna, and take it in the morning as required. Take 
one drachm each of the following drugs: diatonlanton, 
diacorant, diarthod, abbaris, dyacydomei, four ounces of sugar, 
and make into lozenges with plantain water. If the gall be 
sluggish, and does not stir the bowels, give warm injections 
of a decoction of the four mollifying herbs, with honey of 
roses and aloes. 

If the flow be bilious, treat the patient with syrup of maidenhair; 
epithynium, polypody, borage, buglos, fumitary, hart’s 
tongue and syrups, bisantius, which must be made without 
vinegar, else it will assist the disease instead of nature, for 
melancholy is increased by the use of vinegar, and both 
Hippocrates, Silvius and Avenzoar reject it as injurious for 
the womb, and therefore not to be used internally in uterine 
diseases. Pilulae sumariae, pilulae lud. delupina, lazuli diosena 
and confetio hamec are purges of bile. Take two ounces of 
pounded prunes, one drachm of senna, a drachm and a half 
each of epithimium, polypody and fumitary, and an ounce 
of sour dates, and make a decoction with endive water; take 
four ounces of it and add three drachms of hamesech and 

three of manna. Or take a scruple each of pil. indic. foetid, 
agarici, trochis ati; one scruple of rhubarb pills, six grains of 
lapis lazuli, make into pills with epithimium, and take them 
once a week. Take three drachms of elect. loetificans. Galen 
three drachms, a drachm each of diamargaritum, calimi, 
diamosci dulus; a drachm of conserve of borage, violets and 
burglos; one drachm of candied citron peel, seven ounces of 
sugar, and make into lozenges with rose water. 

Lastly let the womb be cleansed of all corrupt matter, and 
then be strengthened. In order to purify it, make injections 
of the decoction of betony, feverfew, spikenard, bismust, 
mercury and sage, and add two ounces each of sugar and 
sweet almond oil; pessaries may also be made of silk or cotton, 
softened in the juice of the above mentioned herbs. 

You must prepare trochisks, thus, to strengthen the womb. 
Take one ounce each of mugwort, feverfew, myrrh, amber, 
mace, storax, ling aloes and red roses, and make lozenges or 
troches with mucilage of tragacanth; throw one of them on 
to hot coals and fumigate the womb with red wine, in which 
mastic, fine bole, malustia and red roots have been decocted; 
anoint the matrix with oil of quinces and myrtles, and apply 

67 



The Works of Aristotle 

a plaster to it, for the womb; and let the woman take 
diamosdum dulco, aract, and slemoticum every morning. 

A drying diet is recommended as best, because in these 
cases the body abounds with phlegmatic and crude humours. 
On this account, Hippocrates advises the patient to go to 
bed supperless. Her food should consist of partridges, pheasant 
and grouse, roasted rather than boiled, too much sleep 
must be prohibited whilst moderate exercise is very advisable. 


CHAPTER VI 

The Suffocation of the Mother 

THIS, which if simply considered, will be found to be merely 
the cause of an effect, is called in English, “the suffocation of 
the mother,” not because the womb is strangled, but because 
by its retraction towards the midriff and stomach, which presses 
it up, so that the instrumental cause of respiration, the midriff, 
is suffocated, and acting with the brain, cause the animating 
faculty, the efficient cause of respiration, also to be interrupted, 
when the body growing cold, and the action weakened, 
the woman falls to the ground as if she were dead. 

Some women remain longer in those hysterical attacks than 
others, and Rabbi Moses mentions some who lay in the fit 
for two days. Rufus writes of one who continued in it for 
three days and three nights, and revived at the end of the 
three days. And I will give you an example so that we may 
take warning by the example of other men. Paroetus mentions 
a Spanish woman who was suddenly seized with suffocation 
of the womb, and was thought to be dead. Her friends, 

68 



The Works of Aristotle 

for their own satisfaction, sent for a surgeon in order to have 
her opened, and as soon as he began to make an incision, she 
began to move, and come to herself again with great cries, to 
the horror and surprise of all those present. 

In order that the living may be distinguished from the dead, 
old writers prescribe three experiments. The first is, to lay a 
feather on the mouth, and by its movements you may judge 
whether the patient be alive or dead; the second is, to place a 
glass of water on the breast, and if it moves, it betokens life; 
the third is, to hold a bright, clean, looking-glass to the mouth 
and nose, and if the glass be dimmed with a little moisture 
on it, it betokens life. These three experiments are good, but 
you must not depend upon them too much, for though the 
feather and the glass do not move, and the looking-glass continues 
bright and clear, yet it is not a necessary consequence 
that she is dead. For the movement of the lungs, by which 
breathing is produced, may be checked, so that she cannot 
breathe, and yet internal heat may remain, which is not evident 
by the motion of the breast or lungs, but lies hidden in 
the heart and arteries. 

Examples of this we find in flies and swallows, who seem 

dead to all outward appearances, breathless and inanimate, 
and yet they live by that heat which is stored up in the heart 
and inward arteries. At the approach of summer, however, 
the internal heat, being restored to the outer parts, they are 
then brought to life again, out of their sleeping trance. 

Those women, therefore, who apparently die suddenly, and 
from no visible cause, should not be buried until the end of 
three days, lest the living be buried instead of the dead. 

CURE 

The part affected is the womb, of which there are two motions—
natural and symptomatic. The natural motion is, 
when the womb attracts the male seed, or expels the infant, 
and the symptomatical motion, of which we are speaking, is 
a convulsive drawing up of the womb. 

The cause is usually in the retention of the seed, or in the 
suppression of the menses, which causes a repletion of the 
corrupt humours of the womb, from which a windy refrigeration 
arises, which produces a convulsion of the ligaments 

69 



The Works of Aristotle 

of the womb. And just as it may arise from humidity or repletion, 
so also, as it is a convulsion, it may be caused by dryness 
or emptiness. Lastly also, it may arise from abortion or 
from difficult childbirth. 

SIGNS 

On the approach of suffocation of the womb the face becomes 
pale, there is a weakness of the legs, shortness of breathing, 
frigidity of the whole body, with a spasm in the throat, 
and then the woman falls down, bereft of sense and motion; 
the mouth of the womb is closed up, and feels hard when 
touched with the finger. When the paroxysm or the fit is 
over, she opens her eyes, and as she feels an oppression of the 
stomach, she tries to vomit. And lest any one should be deceived 
into taking one disease for another, I will show how it 
may be distinguished from those diseases which most resemble 
it. 

It differs from apoplexy, as it comes without the patient 
crying out; in hysterical fits also the sense of feeling is not 

altogether destroyed and lost, as it is in apoplexy; and it differs 
from epilepsy, as the eyes are not distorted, and there is 
spongy froth from the mouth. That convulsive motion also, 
which is frequently accompanied by symptoms of suffocation, 
is not universal, as it is in epilepsy, but there is some 
convulsion, but that without any violent agitation. In syncope 
both breathing and the pulse fail, the face grows pale, 
and the woman faints suddenly; but in hysterical attacks there 
are usually both breathing and pulse, though these are indistinct; 
the face is red and she has a forewarning of the approaching 
fit. It cannot, however, be denied that syncope 
may accompany this feeling of suffocation. Lastly, it can be 
distinguished from lethargy by the pulse, which is rapid in 
the former, but weak in the latter. 

CURE 

In the cure of this affection, two things must be taken care 
of:—In the first place, nature must be stimulated to expel 
these hurtful humours which obscure the senses, so that the 

70 



The Works of Aristotle 

woman may be brought back from that sleepy fit. Secondly, 
during the intervals of the attack, proper remedies must be 
employed, in order to remove the cause. 

To stimulate nature, apply cupping-glasses to the hips and 
navel: apply ligatures to the thighs, rub the extremities with 
salt, mustard and vinegar, and shout and make a great noise 
in her ears. Hold asafoetida to the nose, or sacopenium 
steeped in vinegar; make her sneeze by blowing castor-powder, 
white pepper and hellebore up her nose; hold burnt feathers, 
hair, leather, or anything else with a strong, stinking smell 
under her nose, for bad odours are unpleasant to nature, and 
the animal spirits so strive against them, that the natural heat 
is restored by their means. The brain is sometimes so oppressed, 
that it becomes necessary to burn the outer skin of 
the head with hot oil, or with a hot iron, and strong injections 
and suppositories are useful. Take a handful each of 
sage, calamint, horehound, feverfew, marjoram, betony and 
hyssop; half an ounce of aniseed; two drachma each of 
coloquintida, white hellebore and salgem; boil these in two 
quarts of water till reduced to half; add two ounces of castor 
oil and two drachms of hiera piera and make an injection of 

it. Or take two ounces of boiled honey, half a scruple of 
spurge, four grains of coloquint, two grains of hellebore and 
drachm of salt; make a suppository. Hippocrates mentions a 
hysterical woman who could only be relieved of the paroxysms 
by pouring cold water on her: yet this is a strange cure, 
and should only be administered in the heat of summer, when 
the sun is in the tropic of Cancer. 

If it be caused by the retention and corruption of the seed, 
let the mid-wife take oil of lilies, marjoram and bay leaves, 
and dissolve two grains of civet in them, and the same quantity 
of musk, and at the moment of the paroxysm let her dip 
her finger into the mixture and put it into the neck of the 
womb, and tickle and rub it with it. 

When the fit is over, proceed to remove the cause. If it 
arises from suppression of the menses, look in Chapter XI, 

p. 102, for the cure. If it arises from the retention of the 
seed, a good husband will administer the cure, but those 
who cannot honourably obtain that remedy, must use such 
means as will dry up and diminish the seed, as diaciminum, 
diacalaminthes, etc. The seed of the agnus castus is highly 
valued as a draught, whether taken inwardly, applied out71 



The Works of Aristotle 

wardly or used as a suffumigation. It was held in high esteem 
by the Athenian women, for by its means they remained as 
pure vessels and preserved their chastity, by only strewing it 
on the bed on which they lay, and hence the name of agnus 
castus, which was given to it, as denoting its effects. Make an 
issue on the inside of each leg, four inches below the knee, 
and then make lozenges of two scruples of agric, half a scruple 
each of wild carrot seed and ligne aloes; three drachms of 
washed turpentine, and make a bolus with a conserve of flowers. 
Eight drachms of castor taken in white wine are very 
useful in this case, or you may make pills of it with dog’s 
tooth, and take them on going to bed. Take an ounce of 
white briony root dried and cut up like carrots, put it into a 
little wine and place it on the fire, and drink when warm. 
Take one scruple each of myrrh, castor and asafoetida; four 
grains each of saffron and rue-seed, and make eight pills and 
take two every night on going to bed. 

Galen, from his own experience, recommends powdered 
agaric, of which he frequently gave one scruple in white wine. 
Put a head of bruised garlic on the navel at bed time, and 
fasten it with a swathing band. Make a girdle for the waist of 

galbanum, and also a plaster for the stomach, and put civet 
and musk on one part of it, which must be applied to the 
navel. Take two drachms each of pulvis benedict, and of troches 
of agaric, a sufficient quantity of mithridate, and make 
two pessaries, and that will purge the matrix of wind and 
phlegm; foment the private parts with salad oil in which some 
feverfew and camomiles have been boiled. Take a handful of 
roseleaves and two scruples of cloves, sew them in a little 
cloth and boil them for ten minutes in malmsey; then apply 
them, as hot as they can be borne, to the mouth of the womb, 
but do not let the smell go up her nose. A dry diet must still 
be adhered to and the moderate use of Venus is advisable. 
Let her eat aniseed biscuits instead of bread, and roast meat 
instead of boiled. 

72 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER VII 

Of the Descending or Falling of the Womb 

The descent of the womb is caused by a relaxation of the 
ligatures, whereby the matrix is carried backward, and in some 
women it protrudes to the size of an egg, and there are two 
kinds of this, distinguished by a descending and a precipitation. 
The descending of the womb is, when it sinks down to 
the entrance of the private parts, and appears either very little 
or not at all, to the eye. Its precipitation is when it is turned 
inside out like a purse, and hangs out between the thighs, 
like a cupping glass. 

CAUSE 

This is either external or internal. The external cause is difficult 
childbirth, violent pulling away, or inexperience in drawing 
away the child, violent coughing, sneezing, falls, blows, 
and carrying heavy burdens. The internal cause, is generally 

the flow of too much moisture into these parts, which hinders 
the operation of the womb, whereby the ligaments by 
which the womb is supported are relaxed. The particular 
cause, however, lies in the retention of the semen, or in the 
suppression of the monthly courses. 

SIGNS 

The principal gut and the bladder are often so crushed, that 
the passage of both evacuations is hindered. If the urine flows 
out white and thick, and the midriff is interfered with, the 
loins suffer, the private parts are in pain, and the womb descends 
to them, or else comes clean out. 

PROGNOSTICS 

If an old woman is thus affected, the cure is very difficult, 
because it weakens the womb, and therefore, though it may 
be put back into its proper place, yet it is apt to get displaced 

73 



The Works of Aristotle 

again, by a very slight amount of illness. And also with 
younger women, if this disease is inveterate, and if it is caused 
by putrefaction of the nerves, it is incurable. 

CURE 

The womb, being placed by nature between the straight gut 
and the bladder, ought not to be put back again until the 
powers of both are excited. Now that nature is relieved of 
her burden, let the woman be laid on her back so that her 
legs may be higher than her head; let her feet be drawn up 
towards her private parts, and her knees spread open. Then 
apply oil of sweet almonds and lilies, or a decoction of mallows, 
beet, fenugreek and linseed, to the swelling; when the 
inflammation is reduced, let the midwife rub her hand with 
oil of mastic, and restore the womb to its proper place. When 
the matrix is up, the patient’s position must be changed. Her 
legs must be put out quite straight and laid together, and 
apply six cupping glasses to her breast and navel. Boil feverfew, 
mugwort, red rose leaves and comfrey in red wine; make 

a suffumigation for the matrix, and apply sweet scents to her 
nose. When she comes out of her bath, give her an ounce of 
syrup of feverfew with a drachm of dog’s tooth (mithridate). 
Take three drachms each of laudanum and mastic, and make 
a plaster for the navel of it, and then make pessaries of asafoetida, 
saffron, comfrey, and mastic, adding a little castor 
oil.—Parius in such cases makes his pessaries only of cork, 
shaped like a small egg; he covered them with wax and mastic 
dissolved together, and fastening them to a thread, he put 
them into the womb. 

The immediate danger being now removed and the matrix 
returned to its natural place the remote cause must be got 
rid of. If she be of full habit of body open a vein, after preparing 
her with syrup of betony, calamint, hyssop and feverfew. 
Give a purge, and if the stomach be oppressed with any 
crude matter relieve it by emetics and by sudorifics of lignum 
sanctum and sassafras taken twenty days consecutively, which 
dry up the superfluous moisture, and consequently suppress 
the cause of the disease. 

The air should be hot and dry, and her diet hot and attenuating. 
Let her abstain from dancing, jumping, sneezing, 

74 



The Works of Aristotle 

as well as from all mental and bodily emotions, eat sparingly, 
not drink much, and be moderate in her sleep. 

CHAPTER VIII 

Of the Inflammation of the Womb 

THE PHLEGMON, or inflammation of the matrix, is a humour 
which affects the whole womb, and is accompanied by unnatural 
heat, by obstruction and by an accumulation of corrupt 
blood. 

CAUSE 

The cause of this affection is suppression of the courses, fullness 
of body, the immoderate use of sexual intercourse, frequent 
handling the genitals, difficult child-birth, violent 
motions of the body, falls, blows, to which may be added, 
the use of strong pessaries, whereby the womb is frequently 
inflamed, cupping glasses, also, fastened to the pubis and 
hypogastrium, draw the humours of the womb. 

75 



The Works of Aristotle 

SIGNS CURE 


The signs are pains in the lower parts of the body and head, 
humours, sickness, coldness in the knees, throbbing in the 
neck, palpitation of the heart. Often, also, there is shortness 
of breath because of the heart which is close to the midriff, 
and the breasts sympathising with the swollen and painful 
womb. Besides this, if the front of the matrix be inflamed, 
the privates suffer, and the urine is suppressed, or only flows 
with difficulty. If the hinder part be inflamed, the loins and 
back suffer, and the bowels are very costive; if the right side 
be inflamed, the right hip suffers, and the right leg is heavy 
and moves slowly, so that at times she seems almost lame. If, 
however, the left side of the womb be inflamed, then the left 
hip suffers and the left leg is weaker than the right. If the 
neck of the womb is affected, by putting her finger in, the 
midwife feels that its mouth is contracted and closed up, 
and that it is hard round it. 

In the cure, first of all, let the humours which flow to the 
womb be expelled. To effect this, after the bowels have been 
loosened by cooling clysters bleeding will be necessary. Therefore, 
open a vein in the arm, if she is not with child; the day 
after strike the saphena in both feet, fasten ligatures and cupping 
glasses to the arm, and rub the upper part. Purge gently 
with cassia, rhubarb, senna and myrobalan. Take one drachm 
of senna, a scruple of aniseed, myrobalan, half an ounce, 
with a sufficient quantity of barley water. Make a decoction 
and dissolve syrup of succory in it, and two ounces of rhubarb; 
pound half an ounce of cassia with a few drops of oil of 
aniseed and make a draught. At the commencement of the 
disease, anoint the private parts and loins with oil of roses 
and quinces: make plasters of plantain, linseed, barley meal, 
melilot, fenugreek, white of eggs, and if the pain be intense, 
a little laudanum; foment the genitals with a decoction of 
poppy-heads, purslace, knot-grass and water-lilies. Make injections 
of goat’s milk, rose water, clarified whey and honey 
of roses. When the disease is on a decline, use injections of 

76 



The Works of Aristotle 

sage, linseed, mugwort, pennyroyal, horehound, fenugreek, 
and anoint the lower parts of the stomach with oil of 
camomiles and violets. 

Take four ounces each of lily and mallow roots, a handful 
of dog’s mercury, a handful and a half each of mugwort, 
feverfew, camomile flowers and melilot, bruise the herbs and 
roots, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of milk; then 
add two ounces each of fresh butter, oil of camomiles and 
lilies, with a sufficient quantity of bran, make two plasters, 
and apply one before and the other behind. 

If the tumour cannot be removed, but seems inclined to 
suppurate, take three drachms each of fenugreek, mallow 
roots, boiled figs, linseed, barley meal, dove’s dung and turpentine; 
half a drachm of deer’s suet, half a scruple of opium 
and make a plaster of wax. 

Take bay leaves, sage, hyssop, camomiles, and mugwort, 
and make an infusion in water. 

Take half a handful of wormwood and betony and half a 
pint each of white wine and milk, boil them until reduced to 
half; then take four ounces of this decoction and make an 
injection, but you must be careful that the humours are not 

brought down into the womb. Take three drachms each of 
roast figs, and bruised dog’s mercury; three drachms each of 
turpentine and duck’s grease, and two grains of opium; make 
a pessary with wax. 

The room must be kept cool, and all motions of the body, 
especially of the lower parts, must be prohibited. Wakefulness 
is to be recommended, for humours are carried inward 
by sleep, and thus inflammation is increased. Eat sparingly, 
and drink only barley water or clarified whey, and eat chickens 
and chicken broth, boiled with endive, succory, sorrel, 
bugloss and mallows. 

77 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER IX 

Of Scirrhous Tumours, or Hardness of the Womb 

A scirrhus, or a hard unnatural swelling of the matrix is generally 
produced by neglected, or imperfectly cured phlegm, 
which, insensibly, hinders the functions of the womb, and 
predisposes the whole body to listlessness. 

CAUSE 

One cause of this disease may be ascribed to want of judgment 
on the part of the physician, as many empirics when 
attending to inflammation of the womb, chill the humour 
so much that it can neither pass backward nor forward, and 
hence, the matter being condensed, turns into a hard, stony 
substance. Other causes may be suppression of the menses, 
retention of the Lochein, commonly called the after purging; 
eating decayed meat, as in the disordered longing after the 
pleia to which pregnant women are often subject. It may, 

however, also proceed from obstructions and ulcers in the 
matrix or from some evil affections of the stomach or spleen. 

If the bottom of the womb be affected, she feels, as it were, 
a heavy burden representing a mole,7 yet differing from it, in 
that the breasts are attenuated, and the whole body grows less. 
If the neck of the womb be affected, no outward humours will 
appear; its mouth is retracted and feels hard to the touch, nor 
can the woman have sexual intercourse without great pain. 

PROGNOSTICS 

Confirmed scirrhus is incurable, and will turn to cancer or 
incurable dropsy, and when it ends in cancer it proves fatal, 
because as the innate heat of these parts is almost smothered, 
it can hardly be restored again. 

7 Mole: “A somewhat shapeless, compact fleshy mass occurring 
in the uterus, due to the retention and continued life of 
the whole or a part of the foetal envelopes, after the death of 
the foetus (a maternal or true mole); or being some other 
body liable to be mistaken for this, or perhaps a polypus or 
false mole.” (Whitney’s Century Dictionary.) 

78 



The Works of Aristotle 

CURE 


Where there is repletion, bleeding is advisable, therefore open 
a vein in one arm and in both feet, more especially if the 
menses are suppressed. 

Treat the humours with syrup of borage, succory made 
with a poultice, and then take the following pills, according 
to the patient’s strength. 

Hiera piera six drachms, two and a half drachms each of 
black hellebore and polypody; a drachm and a half each of 
agaric, lapis lazuli, sal Indiae, coloquintida, mix them and 
make two pills. After purging, mollify the hardness as follows:—
the privy parts and the neck of the womb with an 
ointment of decalthea and agrippa; or take two drachms each 
of opopanax, bdellium, ammoniac and myrrh, and half a 
drachm of saffron; dissolve the gum in oil of lilies and sweet 
almond and make an ointment with wax and turpentine. 
Apply diacatholicon ferellia below the navel, and make infusions 
of figs, mugwort, mallows, pennyroyal, althea, fennel 
roots, melilot, fenugreek and the four mollifying herbs, with 
oil of dill, camomiles and lilies dissolved in it. Take three 

drachms of gum bdellium, put the stone pyrites on the coals, 
and let her take the fumes into her womb. Foment the privy 
parts with a decoction of the roots and leaves of dane wort. 
Take a drachm each of gum galbanum and opopanax, half 
an ounce each of juice of dane wort and mucilage of 
fenugreek, an ounce of calve’s marrow, and a sufficient quantity 
of wax, and make a pessary. Or make a pessary of lead 
only, dip it in the above mentioned things, and put it up. 

The atmosphere must be kept temperate, and gross and 
salt meats such as pork, bull beef, fish and old cheese, must 
be prohibited. 

79 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER X 

Of Dropsy of the Womb 

Uterine dropsy is an unnatural swelling, caused by the collection 
of wind or phlegm in the cavity, membranes or substance 
of the womb, on account of the want of innate heat 
and of sufficient alimentation, and so it turns into an excrescence. 
The causes are, too much cold and moisture of the 
milt and liver, immoderate drinking, eating insufficiently 
cooked meat, all of which by causing repletion, overpower 
the natural heat. It may likewise be caused by undue menstruation, 
or by any other immoderate evacuation. To these 
may be added abortions, subcutaneous inflammations and a 
hardened swelling of the womb. 

SIGNS 

The signs of this affection are as follows:—The lower parts 
of the stomach, with the genitals, are swollen and painful; 

the feet swell, the natural colour of the face is lost, the appetite 
becomes depraved, and there is a consequent heaviness 
of the whole body. If the woman turns over in bed a noise 
like flowing water is heard, and sometimes water is discharged 
from the womb. If the swelling is caused by wind and the 
stomach feels hot, it sounds like a drum; the bowels rumble, 
and the wind escapes through the neck of the womb with a 
murmuring noise. This affection may be distinguished from 
true conception in many ways, as will be shown in the chapter 
on conception. It is distinguished from common dropsy, 
by the lower parts of the stomach being most swollen. Again, 
it does not appear so injurious in this blood-producing capability, 
nor is the urine so pale, nor the face so altered. The 
upper parts are also not so reduced, as in usual dropsy. 

PROGNOSTICS 

This affection foretells the ruin of the natural functions, by 
that peculiar sympathy it has with the liver, and that, therefore, 
kathydria, or general dropsy will follow. 

80 



The Works of Aristotle 

CURE 


In the cure of this disease, imitate the practice of Hippocrates, 
and first mitigate the pain with fomentations of melilot, dog’s 
mercury, mallows, linseed, camomiles and althoea. Then let 
the womb be prepared with syrup of stoebis, hyssop, calamint, 
mugwort, with distilled water, a decoction of elder, 
marjoram, sage, origan, spearage, pennyroyal, and betony. 
Purge with senna, agaric, rhubarb, and claterium. Take 
spicierum hier, a scruple each of rhubarb, agaric lozenges, 
and make into pills with iris juice. 

When diseases arise from moistness, purge with pills, and 
in those affections which are caused by emptiness or dryness, 
purge by means of a draught. Apply cupping glasses to 
the stomach and also to the navel, especially if the swelling 
be flatulent. Put a seton on to the inside of each leg, the 
width of a hand below the knee. Take two drachms each of 
sparganium, diambrae, diamolet, diacaliminti, diacinamoni, 
myrrh lozenges, and a pound of sugar; make these into lozenges 
with betony water, and take them two hours before 
meals. Apply a little bag of camomiles, cummin and melilot 

boiled in oil of rue, to the bottom of the stomach as hot as it 
can be borne; anoint the stomach and the privates with unguent 
agripp, and unguent aragon. Mix iris oil with it, and 
cover the lower part of the stomach with a plaster of bay 
berries, or a cataplasm made of cummin, camomiles, briony 
root, adding cows’ and goats’ dung. 

Our modern medical writers ascribe great virtues to to-
bacco-water, injected into the womb by means of a clyster. 
Take a handful each of balm of southernwood, origanum, 
wormwood, calamint, bay berries and marjoram, and four 
drachms of juniper berries; make a decoction of these in water, 
and use this for fomentations and infusions. Make pessaries 
of storax, aloes, with the roots of dictam, aristolochia and 
gentian, but instead of this you may use the pessary prescribed 
at the end of Chapter XVII. Let her take aromatic 
electuary, disatyrion and candied eringo roots, every morning. 


The air must be hot and dry, moderate exercise is to be 
taken and too much sleep prohibited. She may eat the flesh 
of partridges, larks, grouse, hares, rabbits, etc., and let her 
drink diluted urine. 

81 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER XI 

Of Moles8 and False Conceptions 

This disease may be defined as an inarticulate shapeless piece 
of flesh, begotten in the womb as if it were true conception. 
In this definition we must note two things: (1) because a 
mole is said to be inarticulate or jointless, and without shape, 
it differs from monstrosities which are both formata and 
articulata; (2) it is said to be, as it were a true conception, 
which makes a difference between a true conception, and a 
mole, and this difference holds good in three ways. First, in 
its genus, because a mole cannot be said to be an animal: 
secondly, in the species, because it has not a human figure 
and has not the character of a man; thirdly, in the individual, 
for it has no affinity to the parent, either in the whole body, 
or in any particular part of it. 

8 Mole: “A somewhat shapeless, compact fleshy mass occurring 
in the uterus, due to the retention and continued life of 
the whole or a part of the foetal envelopes, after the death of 
the foetus (a maternal or true mole); or being some other 
body liable to be mistaken for this, or perhaps a polypus or 
false mole.” (Whitney’s Century Dictionary.) 

CAUSE 


There is a great difference of opinion amongst learned writers 
as to the cause of this affection. Some think, that if the 
woman’s seed goes into the womb, and not the man’s, that 
the mole is produced thereby. Others declare that it springs 
from the menstruous blood, but if these two things were 
granted, then virgins, by having their courses or through 
nocturnal pollutions, might be liable to the same things, 
which none have ever been yet. The true cause of this fleshy 
mole is due both to the man and from the menstruous blood 
in the woman both mixing together in the cavity of the womb. 
Nature finding herself weak there (and yet wishing to propagate 
her species), labours to bring forth a defective conception 
rather than nothing and instead of a living creature produces 
a lump of flesh. 

82 



The Works of Aristotle 

SIGNS 


The signs of a mole are these. The menses are suppressed, the 
appetite becomes depraved, the breasts swell and the stomach 
becomes inflated and hard. So far the symptoms in a 
pregnant woman and in one that has a mole are the same, 
but now this is how they differ. The first sign of difference is 
in the movements of a mole. It may be felt moving in the 
womb before the third month, whereas an infant cannot be 
so felt; yet this motion cannot proceed from any intelligent 
power in the mole, but from the capabilities of the womb, 
and of the seminal vigour, distributed through the substance 
of the mole, for it does not live an animal, but a vegetable 
life, like a plant. Secondly, in a mole the stomach swells suddenly, 
but in true conception it is first contracted, and then 
rises by degrees. Thirdly, if the stomach is pressed with the 
hand, the mole gives way, and returns to its former position 
as soon as the hand is removed. But a child in the womb 
does not move immediately though pressed with the hand, 
and when the hand is removed it returns slowly or not at all. 
Lastly, no child continues in the womb more than eleven 

months, but a mole continues for four or five years, more or 
less, sometimes according as it is fastened to the matrix; and 
I have known a mole pass away in four or five months. If, 
however, it remains until the eleventh month, the woman’s 
legs grow weak and the whole body wastes away, but the 
stomach still increases, which makes some women think that 
they are dropsical, though there is no reason for it, for in 
dropsy the legs swell and grow big, but in a mole they wither 
and fall away. 

CURE 

In the school of Hippocrates we are taught that bleeding 
causes abortion, by taking all the nourishment which should 
preserve the life of the embryo. In order, therefore, that this 
faulty conception may be deprived of that nourishing sap by 
which it lives, open the liver vein and saphena in both feet, 
apply cupping glasses to the loins and sides of the stomach, 
and when that has been done, let the uterine parts be first 
softened, and then the expulsive powers be stimulated to get 

83 



The Works of Aristotle 

rid of the burden. 

In order to relax the ligatures of the mole, take three handfuls 
of mallows with their roots, two handfuls each of 
camomiles, melilot, pellitory of the wall, violet leaves, dog’s 
mercury, fennel roots, parsley, and one pound each of linseed 
and fenugreek; boil them in oil and let the patient sit in 
it up to her navel. When she comes out of her bath, she 
should anoint her private parts and loins with the following 
ointment:—“Take one ounce each of oil of camomiles, lilies 
and sweet almonds: half an ounce each of fresh butter, 
laudanum and ammoniac, and make an ointment with oil 
of lilies. Or, instead of this, you may use unguentum agrippae 
or dialthea. Take a handful of dog’s mercury and althea roots; 
half a handful of flos brochae ursini; six ounces of linseed 
and barley meal. Boil all these together in honey and water 
and make a plaster, and make pessaries of gum galbanum, 
bdellium, ammoniac, figs, pig’s fat and honey. 

After the ligaments of the mole are loosened, let the expulsive 
powers be stimulated to expel the mole, and for doing 
this, all those drugs may be used which are adapted to bring 
on the courses. Take one ounce of myrrh lozenges, half an 

ounce each of castor, astrolachia, gentian and dittany and 
make them into a powder, and take one drachm in four 
ounces of mugwort water. Take calamint, pennyroyal, betony, 
hyssop, sage, horehound, valerian, madder and savine; make 
a decoction in water and take three ounces of it, with one 
and a half ounces of feverfew. Take three scruples each of 
mugwort, myrrh, gentian and pill. coch.; a drachm each of 
rue, pennyroyal and opopanax, and the same of asafoetida, 
cinnamon, juniper-berries and borage, and make into pills 
with savine juice, to be taken every morning. Make an infusion 
of hyssop, bay leaves, bay berries, calamint, camomiles, 
mugwort and savine. Take two scruples each of sacopenium, 
mugwort, savine, cloves, nutmeg, bay berries; one drachm 
of galbanum; one scruple each of hiera piera and black hellebore, 
and make a pessary with turpentine. 

But if these medicaments are not procurable, then the mole 
must be pulled out by means of an instrument called the pes 
gryphis,9 which may be done without much danger if it be 
performed by a skilful surgeon. After she has been delivered 
of the mole (because the woman will have lost much blood 

9 Griffin’s claw, a peculiar hooked instrument. 

84 



The Works of Aristotle 

already), let the flow of blood be stopped as soon as possible. 

Apply cupping glasses to the shoulders and ligatures to the 
arms, and if this be not effective, open the liver vein in the 
arm. 

The atmosphere of the room must be kept tolerably dry 
and warm, and she must be put on a dry diet, to soothe the 
system; she must, however, drink white wine. 

CHAPTER XII 


Of Conception and its Signs, and How a Woman may know 
whether it be Male or Female. 

IGNORANCE often makes women the murderesses of the fruit 
of their own body, for many, having conceived and finding 
themselves out of order, and not rightly knowing the cause, 
go to the shop of their own conceit and take whatever they 
think fit, or else (as the custom is) they send to the doctor 
for a remedy, and he, not perceiving the cause of their trouble, 
for nothing can be diagnosed accurately by the urine, prescribes 
what he thinks best; perhaps some diuretic or cathartic, 
which destroy the embryo. Therefore Hippocrates says, 
it is necessary that women should be instructed in the signs 
of conception, so that the parent as well as the child may be 
saved from danger. I shall, therefore, lay down some rules, 
by which every woman may know whether she is pregnant 
or not, and the signs will be taken from the woman, from 
her urine, from the child and from experiments. 

85 



The Works of Aristotle 

SIGNS 


The first day after conception, she feels a slight quivering 
and chilliness throughout her body; there is a tickling of the 
womb and a little pain in the lower parts of her stomach. 
Ten or twelve days after she feels giddy and her eyes dim and 
with circles round them; the breasts swell and grow hard, 
with some pain and pricking in them, whilst the stomach 
rises and sinks again by degrees, and there is a hardness about 
the navel. The nipples grow red, the heart beats unusually 
strongly, the natural appetite abates, and the woman has a 
craving after strange food. The neck of the womb is contracted, 
so that it can scarcely be felt when the finger is put 
in. And the following is an infallible sign; she is alternately 
in high spirits and melancholy; the monthly courses cease 
without any apparent cause, the evacuations from the bowels 
are retained unusually long, by the womb pressing on the 
large gut, and her desire for sexual intercourse is diminished. 
The surest sign is taken from the infant, which begins to 
move in the womb in the third or fourth month, and not in 
the manner of a mole, mentioned above, from side to side 

like a stone, but gently, as may be perceived by applying the 
hand cold upon the stomach. 

SIGNS TAKEN FROM THE URINE 


The best writers affirm that the water of a pregnant woman 
is white and has little specks in it, like those in a sunbeam, 
ascending and descending in it, of an opal colour, and when 
the sediment is disturbed by shaking the urine, it looks like 
carded wool. In the middle of gestation it turns yellow, then 
red and lastly black, with a red film. At night on going to 
bed, let her drink water and honey, and if afterwards she 
feels a beating pain in her stomach and about the navel, she 
has conceived. Or let her take the juice of cardius, and if she 
brings it up again, that is a sign of conception. Throw a clean 
needle into the woman’s urine, put it into a basin and let it 
stand all night. If it is covered with red spots in the morning, 
she has conceived, but if it has turned black and rusty, she 
has not. 

86 



The Works of Aristotle 

SIGNS TAKEN FROM THE SEX, TO SHOW 
WHETHER IT BE A MALE OR FEMALE 


If it is a male, the right breast swells first, the right eye is 
brighter than the left, the face is high-coloured, because the 
colour is such as the blood is, and as the male is conceived of 
purer blood and of more perfect seed than the female, red 
specks in the urine, and making a sediment, show that a 
male has been conceived, but if they are white, a female. Put 
the urine of the woman into a glass bottle, let it stand tightly 
stoppered for two days, then strain it through a fine cloth, 
and you will find little animals in it. If they are red, it is a 
male, but if white, it is a female. 

The belly is rounder and lies higher with a boy than with a 
girl, and the right breast is harder and plumper than the left, 
and the right nipple redder, and the woman’s colour is clearer 
than when she has conceived a girl. 

To conclude, the most certain sign to give credit to, is the 
motion of the child, for the male moves in the third month, 
and the female not until the fourth. 

CHAPTER XIII 

Of Untimely Births 

WHEN THE FRUIT of the womb comes forth before the seventh 
month (that is, before it comes to maturity), it is said to be 
abortive; and, in effect, the children prove abortive, that is, do 
not live, that are born in the eighth month. Why children 
born in the seventh or ninth month should live, and not those 
born in the eighth, may seem strange, and yet it is true. The 
cause of it is ascribed by some to the planet under which the 
child is born; for every month, from conception to birth, is 
governed by its own planet, and in the eighth month Saturn 
predominates, which is dry and cold; and coldness, being an 
utter enemy to life, destroys the natural constitution of the 
child. Hippocrates gives a better reason, viz.:—The infant, 
being every way perfect and complete in the seventh month, 
wants more air and nourishment than it had before, and because 
it cannot obtain this, it tries for a passage out. But if it 
have not sufficient strength to break the membranes and to 
come out as ordained by nature, it will continue in the womb 

87 



The Works of Aristotle 

until the ninth month, so that by that time it may be again 
strengthened. But if it returns to the attempt in the eighth 
month and be born, it cannot live, because the day of its birth 
is either past or is to come. For in the eighth month Avicunus 
says, it is weak and infirm, and therefore on being brought 
into the cold air, its vitality must be destroyed. 

CURE 

Untimely births may be caused by cold, for as it causes the 
fruit of the tree to wither and fall before it is ripe, so it nips 
the fruit of the womb before it comes to perfection, or makes 
it abortive;—sometimes by humidity, which weakens its 
power, so that the fruit cannot be retained until the proper 
time. It may be caused by dryness or emptiness, which rob 
the child of its nourishment, or by an alvine discharge, by 
bleeding or some other evacuation, by inflammation of the 
womb, and other severe disease. Sometimes it is caused by 
joy, anger, laughter and especially by fear, for then the heat 
forsakes the womb, and goes to the heart, and so the cold 

sinks into the womb, whereby the ligaments are relaxed, and 
so abortion follows. On this account, Plato recommended 
that the woman should avoid all temptations to excessive joy 
and pleasure, as well as all occasions for fear and grief. Abortion 
may also be caused by the pollution of the air by filthy 
odours, and especially by the smell of the smouldering wick 
of a candle, and also by falls, blows, violent exercise, jumping, 
dancing, etc. 

SIGNS 

Signs of coming abortion are a falling away of the breast, 
with a flow of watery milk, pains in the womb, heaviness in 
the head, unusual weariness in the hips and thighs, and a 
flowing of the courses. Signs denoting that the fruit is dead 
in the womb are sunken eyes, pains in the head, frights, paleness 
of the face and lips, gnawing at the stomach, no movements 
of the infant; coldness and looseness of the mouth of 
the womb. The stomach falls down, whilst watery and bloody 
discharges come from the womb. 

88 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER XIV 

Directions for Pregnant Women 

THE PREVENTION of untimely births consists in removing the 
aforementioned causes, which must be effected both before 
and after conception. 

Before conception, if the body be too hot, dry or moist, 
employ such treatment as to counteract the symptoms; if 
the blood be vitiated purify it, if plethoric, open the liver 
vein; if gross, reduce it; if too thin strengthen and nourish it. 
All the diseases of the womb must be removed as I have 
shown. 

After conception, let the atmosphere be kept temperate, 
do not sleep too much, avoid late hours, too much bodily 
exercise, mental excitement, loud noises and bad smells, and 
sweet smells must also be avoided by those who are hysterical. 
Refrain from all things that may provoke either urine or 
menstruation, also salt, sour, and windy food, and keep to a 
moderate diet. 

If the bowels are confined, relieve the stomach with injec


tions made of a decoction of mallows and violets, with sugar 
and salad oil; or make a broth with borage, buglos, beetroot, 
and mallows, and add a little manna to it. If, on the other 
hand, she be troubled with looseness of the bowels, do not 
check it with medical advice, for all the uterine fluxes have 
some bad qualities in them, which must be evacuated before 
the discharge is stopped. 

A cough is another thing to which pregnant women are 
frequently liable, and which causes them to run great danger 
of miscarrying, by the shock and continual drain upon the 
vein. To prevent this shave off the hair from the coronal commissures, 
and apply the following plaster to the place. 

Take half an ounce of resin, a drachm of laudanum, a 
drachm each of citron peel, lignaloes and galbanum, with a 
sufficient quantity of liquid and dry styrax. Dissolve the gum 
in vinegar and make a plaster, and at night let her inhale the 
fumes of these lozenges, thrown upon bright coals. Take also 
a drachm and a half each of frankincense, styrax powder and 
red roses: eight drachms of sandrich, a drachm each of mastic, 
benjamin and amber; make into lozenges with turpentine, 
and apply a cautery to the nape of the neck. And every 

89 



The Works of Aristotle 

night let her take the following pills:—Half an ounce each 
of hypocistides, terrae sigilatae and fine bole; two drachms 
each of bistort, alcatia, styrax and calamint, and one drachm 
of cloves, and make into pills with syrup of myrtles. 

In pregnant women, a corrupt matter is generated which, 
flowing to the ventricle, spoils the appetite and causes sickness. 
As the stomach is weak, and cannot digest this matter, 
it sometimes sends it to the bowels which causes a flux of the 
stomach, which greatly adds to the weakness of the womb. 
To prevent all these dangers the stomach must be strengthened 
by the following means:—Take one drachm each of 
lignaloes and nutmeg; a scruple each of mace, cloves, mastic, 
laudanum; an ounce of oil of spikenard; two grains of musk, 
half an ounce each of oil of mastic, quinces and wormwood, 
and make into an ointment for the stomach, to be applied 
before meals. Instead of this, however, you may use cerocum 
stomachile Galeni. Take half an ounce each of conserve of 
borage, buglos and atthos; two drachms each of confection 
of hyacinths, candied lemon peel, specierum, diamarg, pulo. 
de genunis: two scruples each of nutmeg and diambra; two 
drachma each of peony roots and diacoratum, and make into 

an electuary with syrup of roses, which she must take twice a 
day before meals. Another affection which troubles a pregnant 
woman is swelling of the legs, which happens during 
the first three months, by the superfluous humours descending 
from the stomach and liver. To cure this, take two drachms 
of oil of roses, and one drachm each of salt and vinegar; 
shake them together until the salt is dissolved, and anoint 
the legs with it hot, rubbing it well in with the hand. It may 
be done without danger during the fourth, fifth and sixth 
months of pregnancy; for a child in the womb is compared 
to an apple on the tree. For the first three months it is a weak 
and tender subject, like the apple, to fall away; but afterwards, 
when the membranes become strengthened, the fruit 
remains firmly fastened to the womb, and not subject to 
mischances, and so it remains, until the seventh month, until 
when it is near the time, the ligaments are again relaxed 
(like the apple that is almost ripe). 

They grow looser every day, until the appointed time for 
delivery; if, therefore, the body is in real need of purging, the 
woman may do it without danger in the fourth, fifth or sixth 
month, but neither before nor after that unless in the case of 

90 



The Works of Aristotle 

some violent illness, in which it is possible that both mother 
and child may perish. Apply plasters and ointments to the 
loins in order to strengthen the fruit in the womb. Take one 
drachm each of gum Arabic, galangale, bistort, hypocistid 
and storax, a drachm and a half each of fine bole, nutmeg, 
mastic, balaust, dragon’s blood and myrtle berries, and a sufficient 
quantity of wax and turpentine and make into a plaster. 
Apply it to the loins in the winter, and remove it every 
twenty-four hours, lest the loins should become overheated 
by it. In the interim, anoint the private parts and loins with 
countess’ balsam but if it be summer time and the loins hot, 
the following plaster will be more suitable. Take a pound of 
red roses, two drachms each of mastic and red Sanders, one 
drachm each of bole ammoniac and red coral, two drachms 
and a half each of pomegranate seed and prepared coriander 
seed, two scruples of barberries, one ounce each of oil of 
mastic and of quinces, and plantain-juice. 

Anoint the loins also with sandalwood ointment, and once 
a week wash them with two parts of rose-water and one of 
white wine mixed together and warmed at the fire. This will 
assuage the heat of the loins, get rid of the oil of the plaster 

from the pores of the skin, and cause the fresh ointment or 
plaster to penetrate more easily, and to strengthen the womb. 
Some think that a load-stone laid upon the navel, keeps a 
woman from abortion. The same thing is also stated of the 
stone called aetites or eagle-stone, if it is hung round the 
neck. Samian stone has the same virtue. 

91 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER XV 

Directions for Women when they are taken in Labour, to 

ensure their safe Delivery, and Directions for Midwives 

HAVING THUS GIVEN the necessary directions to pregnant 
women, how to manage their health during their pregnancy, 
I will now add what is necessary for them to do, in order 
that they may be safely delivered. 

When the time of birth draws near, the woman must be 
sure to send for a skilful midwife, and that rather too soon 
than too late. She must have a pallet bed ready to place it near 
the fire, so that the midwife and those who are to help her, 
may be able to pass round it, and give assistance on either side, 
as may be required. A change of linen must be in readiness, 
and a small stool to rest her feet against, as she will have more 
power when her legs are bent, than when they are straight. 

When everything is thus ready, and when the woman feels 
the pains coming on, if the weather be not cold, she should 
walk about the room, rest on the bed occasionally, waiting 
for the breaking of the waters, which is a fluid contained in 

one of the outward membranes, and which flows out thence, 
when the membrane is broken by the struggles of the child. 
There is no special time for this discharge, though it generally 
takes place about two hours before the birth. Movements will 
also cause the womb to open and dilate, and when lying long 
in bed will be uncomfortable. If she be very weak she may 
take some mild cordial to give her strength, if her pain will 
permit her; and if the labour be tedious, she may be revived 
with chicken or mutton broth, or she may take a poached egg; 
but she must be very careful not to eat to excess. 

There are many postures in which women are delivered; 
some sitting in a chair, supported by others, or resting on 
the bed; some again upon their knees and resting on their 
arms; but the safest and most commodious way, is in the 
bed, and then the midwife ought to observe the following 
rules:—Let her lay the woman upon her back, with her head 
a little raised by means of a pillow, with similar supports for 
her loins and buttocks, which latter should also be raised, 
for if she lies low, she cannot be delivered so easily. Then let 
her keep her knees and thighs as far apart as she can, her legs 
bent inward towards each other, and her buttocks, the soles 

92 



The Works of Aristotle 

of her feet and her heels being placed upon a small rest, placed 
for the purpose, so that she may be able to strain the stronger. 
In case her back should be very weak, a swathing band 
should be placed under it, the band being doubled four times 
and about four inches broad. This must be held by two persons 
who must raise her up a little every time her pains come 
on, with steady hands and in even time, but if they be not 
exact in their movements, they had better leave her alone. At 
the same time two women must hold her shoulders so that 
she may strain out the foetus more easily; and to facilitate 
this let one stroke or press the upper part of her stomach 
gently and by degrees. The woman herself must not be nervous 
or downhearted, but courageous, and forcing herself 
by straining and holding her breath. 

When delivery is near, the midwife must wait patiently 
until the child’s head, or some limb, bursts the membranes, 
for if the midwife through ignorance, or through haste to go 
to some other woman, as some have done, tears the membrane 
with her nails, she endangers both the woman and the 
child; for by lying dry and lacking that slipperiness which 
should make it easy, it comes forth with severe pains. 

When the head appears, the midwife must hold it gently 
between her hands, and draw the child, whenever the woman’s 
pains are upon her, but at no other times; slipping her forefingers 
under its armpits by degrees, and not using a rough 
hand in drawing it out, lest the tender infant might become 
deformed by such means. As soon as the child is taken out, 
which is usually with its face downwards,—it should be laid 
upon its back, that it may receive external respiration more 
freely; then cut the navel string about three inches from the 
body, tying the end which adheres to it with a silk string, as 
closely as you can; then cover the child’s head and stomach 
well, allowing nothing to touch its face. 

When the child has been thus brought forth, if it be healthy 
lay it aside, and let the midwife attend to the patient by drawing 
out the afterbirth; and this she may do by wagging and 
stirring it up and down, and afterwards drawing it out gently. 
And if the work be difficult, let the woman hold salt in 
her hands, close them tightly and breathe hard into them, 
and by that she will know whether the membranes are broken 
or not. It may also be known by making her strain or 
vomit; by putting her fingers down her throat, or by strain


93 



The Works of Aristotle 

ing or moving her lower parts, but let all be done immediately. 
If this should fail, let her take a draught of elder water, 
or the yolk of a new laid egg, and smell a piece of asafoetida, 
especially if she is troubled with a windy colic. If she happen 
to take cold, it is a great obstruction to the afterbirth; in 
such cases the midwife ought to chafe the woman’s stomach 
gently, so as to break, not only the wind, but also to force the 
secundine to come down. But if these should prove ineffectual, 
the midwife must insert her hand into the orifice of the 
womb and draw it out gently. 

Having thus discussed common births, or such as are generally 
easy, I shall now give directions in cases of extremity. 

CHAPTER XVI 

What ought to be done in cases of extremity, especially in 
women who, in labour, are attacked by a flux of blood, 
convulsions and fits of wind. 

IF THE WOMAN’S LABOUR be hard and difficult, greater care must 
be taken than at other times. And, first of all, the situation of 
the womb and her position in lying must be across the bed, 
and she must be held by strong persons to prevent her from 
slipping down or moving during the surgeon’s operations. Her 
thighs must be put as far apart as possible, and held so, whilst 
her head must rest upon a bolster, and her loins be supported 
in the same manner. After her rump and buttocks have been 
raised, be careful to cover her stomach, belly and thighs with 
warm clothes, to keep them from the cold. 

When the woman is in this position, let the operator put 
up his or her hand, if the neck of the womb be dilated, and 
remove the coagulated blood that obstructs the passage of 
the birth; and by degrees make way gently, let him remove 
the infant tenderly, having first anointed his hand with but


94 



The Works of Aristotle 

ter or some harmless salve. And if the waters have not come 
down, they may then be let out without difficulty. Then, if 
the infant should attempt to come out head foremost, or 
crosswise, he should turn it gently, to find the feet. Having 
done this, let him draw out one and fasten it with ribbon 
and then put it up again, and by degrees find the other, bringing 
them as close together and as even as possible, and between 
whiles let the woman breathe, and she should be urged 
to strain so as to help nature in the birth, that it may be 
brought forth. And to do this more easily, and that the hold 
may be surer, wrap a linen cloth round the child’s thighs, 
taking care to bring it into the hand face downwards. 

In case of flux of blood, if the neck of the womb be open, 
it must be considered whether the infant or the secundine, 
generally called the afterbirth, comes first, and as the latter 
happens to do so occasionally, it stops the mouth of the womb 
and hinders the birth, and endangers both the woman’s and 
the child’s life. In this case the afterbirth must be removed 
by a quick turn. They have deceived many people, who, feeling 
their softness, have supposed that the womb was not 
dilated, and by that means the woman and child, or at least 

the latter, have been lost. When the afterbirth has been removed, 
the child must be sought for and drawn out, as directed 
above; and if the woman or the child die in such a 
case, the midwife or the surgeon are blameless because they 
have used their best endeavours. 

If it appears upon examination that the afterbirth comes 
first, let the woman be delivered as quickly as possible, because 
a great flow of blood will follow, for the veins are opened, 
and on this account two things have to be considered. 

First:—The manner in which the afterbirth advances, 
whether it be much or little. If the former, and the head of 
the child appears first, it may be guided and directed towards 
the neck of the womb, as in the case of natural birth, 
but if there appears any difficulty in the delivery, the best 
way is to look for the feet, and draw it out by them; but if 
the latter, the afterbirth may be put back with a gentle hand, 
and the child taken out first. But if the afterbirth has come 
so far forward that it cannot be put back, and the child follows 
it closely, then the afterbirth must be removed very carefully, 
and as quickly as may be, and laid aside without cutting 
the entrail that is fastened to it; for you may be guided 

95 



The Works of Aristotle 

to the infant by it, which must be drawn out by the feet, 
whether it be alive or dead, as quickly as possible; though 
this is not to be done except in cases of great necessity, for in 
other cases the afterbirth ought to come last. 

In drawing out a dead child, these directions should be 
carefully followed by the surgeon, viz.—If the child be found 
to be dead, its head appearing first, the delivery will be more 
difficult; for it is an evident sign that the woman’s strength is 
beginning to fail her, that, as the child is dead and has no 
natural power, it cannot be assisting in its own delivery in 
any way. Therefore the most certain and the safest way for 
the surgeon is, to put up his left hand, sliding it into the 
neck of the womb, and into the lower part of it towards the 
feet, as hollow in the palm as he can, and then between the 
head of the infant and the neck of the womb. Then, having 
a forceps in the right hand, slip it up above the left hand, 
between the head of the child and the flat of the hand, fixing 
it in the bars of the temple near the eye. As these cannot be 
got at easily in the occipital bone, be careful still to keep the 
hand in its place, and gently move the head with it, and so 
with the right hand and the forceps draw the child forward, 

and urge the woman to exert all her strength, and continue 
drawing whenever her pains come on. When the head is 
drawn out, he must immediately slip his hand under the 
child’s armpits, and take it quite out, and give the woman a 
piece of toasted white bread, in a quarter of a pint of 
Hippocras wine. 

If the former application fails let the woman take the following 
potion hot when she is in bed, and remain quiet until 
she begins to feel it operating. 

Take seven blue figs, cut them into pieces and add five 
grains each of fenugreek, motherwort and rue seed, with six 
ounces each of water of pennyroyal and motherwort; reduce 
it to half the quantity by boiling and after straining add one 
drachm of troches of myrrh and three grains of saffron; 
sweeten the liquor with loaf sugar, and spice it with cinnamon.—
After having rested on this, let her strain again as 
much as possible, and if she be not successful, make a fumigation 
of half a drachm each of castor, opopanax, sulphur 
and asafoetida, pounding them into a powder and wetting 
the juice of rue, so that the smoke or fumes may go only into 
the matrix and no further. 

96 



The Works of Aristotle 

If this have not the desired effect, then the following plaster 
should be applied:—Take an ounce and a half of 
balganum, two drachms of colocynth, half an ounce each of 
the juice of motherwort and of rue, and seven ounces of 
virgin bees’ wax: pound and melt them together, spreading 
them on a cere-cloth so that they may spread from the navel 
to the os pubis and extending to the flanks, at the same time 
making a pessary of wood, enclosing it in a silk bag, and 
dipping it in a decoction of one drachm each of sound birth-
wort, savin colocinthis, stavescare and black hellebore, with 
a small sprig or two of rue. 

But if these things have not the desired effect, and the 
woman’s danger increases, let the surgeon use his instruments 
to dilate and widen the womb, for which purpose the woman 
must be placed on a chair, so that she may turn her buttocks 
as far from its back as possible, at the same time drawing up 
her legs as close as she can and spreading her thighs open as 
wide as possible; or if she is very weak it may be better to lay 
her on the bed with her head downwards, her buttocks raised 
and both legs drawn up. Then the surgeon may dilate the 
womb with his speculum matrices and draw out the child 

and the afterbirth together, if it be possible, and when this is 
done, the womb must be well washed and anointed, and the 
woman put back to bed and comforted with spices and cordials. 
This course must be adopted in the case of dead children 
and moles, afterbirths and false births, which will not 
come out of themselves, at the proper time. If the aforementioned 
instrument will not widen the womb sufficiently, then 
other instruments, such as the drake’s bill, or long pincers, 
ought to be used. 

If any inflammation, swelling or congealed blood happens 
to be contracted in the womb under the film of these tumours, 
either before or after the birth, let the midwife lance it with 
a penknife or any suitable instrument, and squeeze out the 
matter, healing it with a pessary dipped in oil of red roses. 

If the child happens at any time to be swollen through 
cold or violence, or has contracted a watery humour, if it is 
alive, such means must be used as are least injurious to the 
child or mother; but if it be dead, the humours must be let 
out by incisions, to facilitate the birth. 

If, as often happens, the child is presented feet foremost, 
with the hands spreading out from the hips, the midwife 

97 



The Works of Aristotle 

must in such a case be provided with the necessary ointments 
to rub and anoint the child with, to help it coming 
forth, lest it should turn into the womb again, holding both 
the infant’s arms close to the hips at the same time, that it 
may come out in this manner; but if it proves too big, the 
womb must be well anointed. The woman should also take a 
sneezing powder, to make her strain; the attendant may also 
stroke her stomach gently to make the birth descend, and to 
keep it from returning. 

It happens occasionally, that the child presenting itself with 
the feet first, has its arms extended above its head; but the 
midwife must not receive it so, but put it back into the womb, 
unless the passage be extraordinarily wide, and then she must 
anoint both the child and the womb, and it is not safe to draw 
it out, which must, therefore, be done in this manner.—The 
woman must lie on her back with her head low and her buttocks 
raised; and then the midwife must compress the stomach 
and the womb with a gentle hand, and by that means put 
the child back, taking care to turn the child’s face towards the 
mother’s back, raising up its thighs and buttocks towards the 
navel, so that the birth may be more natural. 

If the child happens to come out with one foot, with the 
arm extended along the side and the other foot turned backwards; 
then the woman must be immediately put to bed and 
laid in the above-described position; when the midwife must 
immediately put back the foot which appears so, and the 
woman must rock herself from side to side, until she finds 
that the child has turned, but she must not alter her position 
nor turn upon her face. After this she may expect her pains 
and must have great assistance and cordials so as to revive 
and support her spirits. 

At other times it happens that the child lies across in the 
womb, and falls upon its side; in this case the woman must 
not be urged in her labour; therefore, the midwife when she 
finds it so, must use great diligence to reduce it to its right 
form, or at least to such a form in the womb as may make 
the delivery possible and most easy by moving the buttocks 
and guiding the head to the passage; and if she be successful 
in this, let the woman rock herself to and fro, and wait with 
patience till it alters its way of lying. 

Sometimes the child hastens simply by expanding its legs 
and arms; in which, as in the former case, the woman must 

98 



The Works of Aristotle 

rock herself, but not with violence, until she finds those parts 
fall to their proper station; or it may be done by a gentle 
compression of the womb; but if neither of them avail, the 
midwife must close the legs of the infant with her hand, and 
if she can get there, do the like by the arms, and so draw it 
forth; but if it can be reduced of itself to the posture of a 
proper birth it is better. 

If the infant comes forward, both knees forward, and the 
hands hanging down upon the thighs, then the midwife must 
put both knees upward, till the feet appear; taking hold of 
which with her left hand let her keep her right hand on the 
side of the child, and in that posture endeavour to bring it 
forth. But if she cannot do this, then also the woman must 
rock herself until the child is in a more convenient posture 
for delivery. 

Sometimes it happens that the child presses forward with 
one arm extended on its thighs, and the other raised over its 
head, and the feet stretched out at length in the womb. In 
such case, the midwife must not attempt to receive the child 
in that posture, but must lay the woman on the bed in the 
manner aforesaid, making a soft and gentle compression on 

her belly, oblige the child to retire; which if it does not, then 
must the midwife thrust it back by the shoulder, and bring 
the arm that was stretched above the head to its right station; 
for there is most danger in these extremities; and, therefore, 
the midwife must anoint her hands and the womb of 
the woman with sweet butter, or a proper pomatum, and 
thrust her hand as near as she can to the arm of the infant, 
and bring it to the side. But if this cannot be done, let the 
woman be laid on the bed to rest a while; in which time, 
perhaps, the child may be reduced to a better posture; which 
the midwife finding, she must draw tenderly the arms close 
to the hips and so receive it. 

If an infant come with its buttocks foremost, and almost 
double, then the midwife must anoint her hand and thrust 
it up, and gently heaving up the buttocks and back, strive to 
turn the head to the passage, but not too hastily, lest the 
infant’s retiring should shape it worse: and therefore, if it 
cannot be turned with the hand, the woman must rock herself 
on the bed, taking such comfortable things as may support 
her spirits, till she perceives the child to turn. 

If the child’s neck be bowed, and it comes forward with its 

99 



The Works of Aristotle 

shoulders, as it sometimes doth, with the hands and feet 
stretched upwards, the midwife must gently move the shoulders, 
that she may direct the head to the passage; and the 
better to effect it, the woman must rock herself as aforesaid. 

These and other like methods are to be observed in case a 
woman hath twins, or three children at a birth, which sometimes 
happens: for as the single birth hath but one natural 
and many unnatural forms, even so it may be in a double 
and treble birth. 

Wherefore, in all such cases the midwife must take care to 
receive the first which is nearest the passage; but not letting 
the other go, lest by retiring it should change the form; and 
when one is born, she must be speedy in bringing forth the 
other. And this birth, if it be in the natural way, is more easy, 
because the children are commonly less than those of single 
birth, and so require a less passage. But if this birth come 
unnaturally, it is far more dangerous than the other. 

In the birth of twins, let the midwife be very careful that 
the secundine be naturally brought forth, lest the womb, 
being delivered of its burden, fall, and so the secundine continue 
longer there than is consistent with the woman’s safety. 

But if one of the twins happens to come with the head, 
and the other with the feet foremost, then let the midwife 
deliver the natural birth first; and if she cannot turn the other, 
draw it out in the posture in which it presses forward; but if 
that with its feet downward be foremost, she may deliver 
that first, turning the other aside. But in this case the midwife 
must carefully see that it be not a monstrous birth, instead 
of twins, a body with two heads, or two bodies joined 
together, which she may soon know if both the heads come 
foremost, by putting up her hand between them as high as 
she can; and then, if she finds they are twins she may gently 
put one of them aside to make way for the other, taking the 
first which is most advanced, leaving the other so that it do 
not change its position. And for the safety of the other child, 
as soon as it comes forth out of the womb, the midwife must 
tie the navel-string, as has before been directed, and also bind, 
with a large, long fillet, that part of the navel which is fastened 
to the secundine, the more readily to find it. 

The second infant being born, let the midwife carefully 
examine whether there be not two secundines, for sometimes 
it falls out, that by the shortness of the ligaments it retires 

100 



The Works of Aristotle 

back to the prejudice of the woman. Wherefore, lest the 
womb should close, it is most expedient to hasten them forth 
with all convenient speed. 

If two infants are joined together by the body, as sometimes 
it monstrously falls out, then, though the head should 
come foremost, yet it is proper, if possible, to turn them and 
draw them forth by the feet, observing, when they come to 
the hips, to draw them out as soon as may be. And here great 
care ought to be used in anointing and widening the passage. 
But these sort of births rarely happening, I need to say 
the less of them, and, therefore, shall show how women 
should be ordered after delivery. 

CHAPTER XVII 


How child-bearing Women ought to be ordered after Delivery. 

IF A WOMAN has had very hard labour, it is necessary that 
she should be wrapped up in a sheep’s skin, taken off before 
it is cold, applying the fleshy side to her veins and 
belly, or, for want of this, the skin of a hare or coney, flayed 
off as soon as killed, may be applied to the same parts, and 
in so doing, a dilation being made in the birth, and the 
melancholy blood being expelled in these parts, continue 
these for an hour or two. 

Let the woman afterwards be swathed with fine linen cloth, 
about a quarter of a yard in breadth, chafing the belly before 
it is swathed, with oil of St. John’s wort; after that raise up 
the matrix with a linen cloth, many times folded: then with 
a linen pillar or quilt, cover the flanks, and place the swathe 
somewhat above the haunches, winding it pretty stiff, applying 
at the same time a linen cloth to her nipples; do not 
immediately use the remedies to keep back the milk, by reason 
the body, at such a time, is out of frame; for there is 

101 



The Works of Aristotle 

neither vein nor artery which does not strongly beat; and 
remedies to drive back the milk, being of a dissolving nature, 
it is improper to apply them to the breasts during such 
disorder, lest by doing so, evil humours be contracted in the 
breast. Wherefore, twelve hours at least ought to be allowed 
for the circulation and settlement of the blood, and what 
was cast on the lungs by the vehement agitation during labour, 
to retire to its proper receptacles. 

Some time after delivery, you may take a restrictive of the 
yolks of two eggs, and a quarter of a pint of white wine, oil 
of St. John’s wort, oil of roses, plantain and roses water, of 
each an ounce, mix them together, fold a linen cloth and 
apply it to the breast, and the pains of those parts will be 
greatly eased. 

She must by no means sleep directly after delivery; but 
about four hours after, she may take broth, caudle or such 
liquid victuals as are nourishing; and if she be disposed to 
sleep it may be very safely permitted. And this is as much, in 
the case of a natural birth, as ought immediately to be done. 

But in case of an extremity or an unnatural birth, the following 
rules ought to be observed:— 

In the first place, let the-woman keep a temperate diet, by 
no means overcharging herself after such an extraordinary 
evacuation, not being ruled by giving credit to unskilful 
nurses, who admonish them to feed heartily, the better to 
repair the loss of blood. For that blood is not for the most 
part pure, but such as has been retained in the vessels or 
membrane better voided, for the health of the woman, than 
kept, unless there happen an extraordinary flux of the blood. 
For if her nourishment be too much, which curding, very 
often turns to imposthumes. 

Therefore, it is requisite, for the first five days especially, 
that she take moderately panado broth, poached eggs, jelly 
of chickens or calves’ feet or fresh barley broth; every day 
increasing the quantity a little. 

And if she intend to be a nurse to the child, she may take 
something more than ordinary, to increase the milk by degrees, 
which must be of no continuance, but drawn off by 
the child or otherwise. In this case likewise, observe to let 
her have coriander or fennel seeds boiled in barley broth; 
but by all means, for the time specified, let her abstain from 
meat. If no fever trouble her, she may drink now and then a 

102 



The Works of Aristotle 

small quantity of pure white wine or of claret, as also syrup 
of maidenhead or any other syrup that is of an astringent 
quality, taken in a little water well boiled. 

After the fear of fever or contraction of humour in the 
breast is over, she may be nourished more plentifully with 
the broth of capons, pullets, pigeons, mutton, veal, etc., which 
must not be until after eight days from the time of delivery; 
at which time the womb, unless some accident binds, has 
purged itself. It will then likewise be expedient to give cold 
meats, but let it be sparingly, so that she may the better gather 
strength. And let her, during the time, rest quietly and free 
from disturbance, not sleeping in the day time, if she can 
avoid it. 

Take of both mallows and pellitory of the wall a handful; 
camomile and melilot flowers, of each a handful; aniseed 
and fennel of each two ounces; boil them in a decoction of 
sheep’s head and take of this three quarts, dissolving in it 
common honey, coarse sugar and fresh butter and administer 
it clysterwise; but if it does not penetrate well take an 
ounce of catholicon. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

Acute Pains after Delivery 

THESE PAINS frequently afflict the woman no less than the pain 
of her labour, and are, by the more ignorant, many times taken 
the one for the other; and sometimes they happen both at the 
same instant; which is occasioned by a raw, crude and watery 
matter in the stomach, contracted through ill digestion; and 
while such pains continue, the woman’s travail is retarded. 

Therefore, to expel fits of the cholic, take two ounces of oil 
of sweet almonds, and an ounce of cinnamon water, with 
three or four drops of syrup of ginger; then let the woman 
drink it off. 

If this does not abate the pain, make a clyster of camomile, 
balm-leaves, oil of olives and new milk, boiling the former 
in the latter. Administer it as is usual in such cases. And then, 
fomentation proper for dispelling the wind will not be amiss. 

If the pain produces a griping in the guts after delivery, 
then take of the root of great comfrey, one drachm, nutmeg 
and peach kernels, of each two scruples, yellow amber, eight 

103 



The Works of Aristotle 

drachms, ambergris, one scruple; bruise them together, and THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN 
give them to the woman as she is laid down, in two or three 
spoonfuls of white wine; but if she be feverish, then let it be BEING CHOICE AND APPROVED REMEDIES FOR 
in as much warm broth. SEVERAL DISEASES INCIDENTAL TO HUMAN 
BODIES 
For the Apoplexy 
Take man’s skull prepared, and powder of male peony, of 
each an ounce and a half, contrayerva, bastard dittany, angelica, 
zedvary, of each two drachms, mix and make a powder, 
add thereto two ounces of candied orange and lemon 
peel, beat all together to a powder, whereof you may take 
half a drachm or a drachm. 
A Powder for the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness. 
Take of opopanax, crude antimony, castor, dragon’s blood, 
peony seeds, of each an equal quantity; make a subtle powder; 
the dose, half a drachm of black cherry water. Before 

104 



The Works of Aristotle 

you take it, the stomach must be prepared with some proper 
vomit, as that of Mynficht’s emetic tartar, from four grains 
to six; if for children, salts of vitrol, from a scruple to half a 
drachm. 

For a Headache of Long Standing 

Take the juice or powder in distilled water of hog lice and 
continue it. 

For Spitting of Blood 

Take conserve of comfrey and of hips, of each an ounce and 
a half; conserve of red roses, three ounces; dragon’s blood, a 
drachm; spices of hyacinths, two scruples; red coral, a drachm; 
mix and with syrup of poppies make a soft electuary. Take 
the quantity of a walnut, night and morning. 

For a Looseness 

Take Venice treacle and diascordium, of each half a drachm, 
in warm ale or water gruel, or what you like best, at night, 
going to bed. 

For the Bloody Flux 

First take a drachm of powder of rhubarb in a sufficient quantity 
of conserve of red roses, in the morning early; then at 
night, take of tornified or roasted rhubarb, half a drachm; 
diascordium, a drachm and a half; liquid laudanum 
cyclomated, a scruple: mix and make into a bolus. 

For an Inflammation of the Lungs 

Take of cherious water, ten ounces; water of red poppies, 
three ounces; syrup of poppies, an ounce; pearl prepared, a 
drachm; make julep, and take six spoonfuls every fourth hour. 

105 



The Works of Aristotle 

An Ointment for the Pleurisy a bath to be used with care of taking cold. 

Take oil of violets or sweet almonds, an ounce of each, with 
wax and a little saffron, make an ointment, warm it and bathe 
it upon the parts affected. 

An Ointment for the Itch 

Take sulphur vive in powder, half an ounce, oil of tartar per 
deliquim, a sufficient quantity, ointment of roses, four ounces; 
make a liniment, to which add a scruple of rhodium to aromatize, 
and rub the parts affected with it. 

For Running Scab 

Take two pounds of tar, incorporate it into a thick mass with 
well-sifted ashes; boil the mass in fountain-water, adding 
leaves of ground-ivy, white horehound, fumitory roots, sharp-
pointed dock and of flocan pan, of each four handfuls; make 

For Worms in Children 

Take wormseed, half a drachm, flour of sulphur, a drachm; 
mix and make a powder. Give as much as will lie on a silver 
threepence, night and morning, in grocer’s treacle or honey, 
or to grown up people, you may add a sufficient quantity of 
aloe rosatum and so make them up into pills; three or four 
may be taken every morning. 

For Fevers in Children 

Take crab-eyes, a drachm, cream of tartar, half a drachm; 
white sugar-candy finely powdered, weight of both; mix all 
well together and give as much as will lie on a silver 
threepence, in a spoonful of barley-water or sack whey. 

106 



The Works of Aristotle 

A Quieting Night-Draught, when the Cough is Violent 

Take water of green wheat, six ounces, syrup diascordium, 
three ounces, take two or three spoonfuls going to bed every 
night or every other night. 

An Electuary for the Dropsy 

Take best rhubarb, one drachm, gum lac, prepared, two 
drachms, zyloaloes, cinnamon, long birthwort, half an ounce 
each, best English saffron, half a scruple; with syrup of chicory 
and rhubarb make an electuary. Take the quantity of a nutmeg 
or small walnut every morning fasting. 

For a Tympany Dropsy 

Take roots of chervil and candied eringo roots, half an ounce 
of each, roots of butcher-broom, two ounces, grass-roots, 
three ounces, shavings of ivory and hartshorn, two drachms 

and a half each; boil them in two or three pounds of spring 
water. Whilst the strained liquor is hot, pour it upon the 
leaves of watercresses and goose-grass bruised, of each a handful, 
adding a pint of Rhenish wine. Make a close infusion for 
two hours, then strain out the liquor again, and add to it 
three ounces of magirtral water and earth worms and an ounce 
and a half of the syrup of the five opening roots. Make an 
apozen, whereof take four ounces twice a day. 

For an Inward Bleeding 

Take leaves of plantain and stinging nettles, of each three 
handfuls, bruise them well and pour on them six ounces of 
plantain water, afterwards make a strong expression and drink 
the whole off. Probatum est. 

107 



The Works of Aristotle 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 

Worthy of Notice 

WHEN YOU FIND 

A red man to be faithful, a tall man to be wise, a fat man to 
be swift of foot, a lean man to be a fool, a handsome man 
not to be proud, a poor man not to be envious, a knave to be 
no liar, an upright man not too bold and hearty to his own 
loss, one that drawls when he speaks not to be crafty and 
circumventing, one that winks on another with his eyes not 
to be false and deceitful, a sailor and hangman to be pitiful, 
a poor man to build churches, a quack doctor to have a good 
conscience, a bailiff not to be a merciless villain, an hostess 
not to over-reckon you, and an usurer to be charitable—— 

THEN SAY, 
Ye have found a prodigy. 

Men acting contrary to the common course of nature. 

PART II 

THE EXPERIENCED MIDWIFE 

INTRODUCTION 

I HAVE GIVEN this Part the title of The Experienced Midwife, 
because it is chiefly designed for those who profess Midwifery, 
and contains whatever is necessary for them to know 
in the practice thereof; and also, because it is the result of 
many years’ experience, and that in the most difficult cases, 
and is, therefore, the more to be depended upon. 

A midwife is the most necessary and honourable office, 
being indeed a helper of nature; which therefore makes it 
necessary for her to be well acquainted with all the operations 
of nature in the work of generation, and instruments 
with which she works. For she that knows not the operations 
of nature, nor with what tool she works, must needs be 
at a loss how to assist therein. And seeing the instruments of 
operation, both in men and women, are those things by which 
mankind is produced, it is very necessary that all midwives 

108 



The Works of Aristotle 

should be well acquainted with them, that they may better 
understand their business, and assist nature, as there shall be 
occasion. 

The first thing then necessary as introductory to this treatise, 
is an anatomical description of the several parts of generation 
both in men and women; but as in the former part of 
this work I have treated at large upon these subjects, being 
desirous to avoid tautology, I shall not here repeat anything 
of what was then said, but refer the reader thereto, as a necessary 
introduction to what follows. And though I shall be 
necessitated to speak plainly so that I may be understood, 
yet I shall do it with that modesty that none shall have need 
to blush unless it be from something in themselves, rather 
than from what they shall find here; having the motto of the 
royal garter for my defence, which is:—“Honi soit qui mal y 
pense,”—“Evil be to him that evil thinks.” 

A GUIDE TO CHILDBEARING WOMEN 

BOOK I 

CHAPTER I 

SECTION I.—Of the Womb. 

IN THIS CHAPTER I am to treat of the womb, which the Latins 
call matrix. Its parts are two; the mouth of the womb and 
the bottom of it. The mouth is an orifice at the entrance into 
it, which may be dilated and shut together like a purse; for 
though in the act of copulation it is big enough to receive 
the glans of the yard, yet after conception, it is so close and 
shut, that it will not admit the point of a bodkin to enter; 
and yet again, at the time of a woman’s delivery, it is opened 
to such an extraordinary degree, that the child passeth 
through it into the world; at which time this orifice wholly 
disappears, and the womb seems to have but one great cavity 
from the bottom to the entrance of the neck. When a woman 
is not with child, it is a little oblong, and of substance very 

109 



The Works of Aristotle 

thick and close; but when she is with child it is shortened, 
and its thickness diminished proportionably to its distension; 
and therefore it is a mistake of anatomists who affirm, 
that its substance waxeth thicker a little before a woman’s 
labour; for any one’s reason will inform him, that the more 
distended it is, the thinner it must be; and the nearer a woman 
is to the time of her delivery the shorter her womb must be 
extended. As to the action by which this inward orifice of 
the womb is opened and shut, it is purely natural; for were it 
otherwise, there could not be so many bastards begotten as 
there are, nor would any married women have so many children. 
Were it in their own power they would hinder conception, 
though they would be willing enough to use copulation; 
for nature has attended that action with so pleasing 
and delightful sensations, that they are willing to indulge 
themselves in the use thereof notwithstanding the pains they 
afterwards endure, and the hazard of their lives that often 
follows it. And this comes to pass, not so much from an 
inordinate lust in woman, as that the great Director of Nature, 
for the increase and multiplication of mankind, and 
even all other species in the elementary world, hath placed 

such a magnetic virtue in the womb, that it draws the seed to 
it, as the loadstone draws iron. 

The Author of Nature has placed the womb in the belly, 
that the heat might always be maintained by the warmth of 
the parts surrounding it; it is, therefore, seated in the middle 
of the hypogastrium (or lower parts of the belly between the 
bladder and the belly, or right gut) by which also it is defended 
from any hurt through the hardness of the bones, and 
it is placed in the lower part of the belly for the convenience of 
copulation, and of a birth being thrust out at full time. 

It is of a figure almost round, inclining somewhat to an 
oblong, in part resembling a pear; for being broad at the 
bottom, it gradually terminates in the point of the orifice 
which is narrow. 

The length, breadth and thickness of the womb differ according 
to the age and disposition of the body. For in virgins 
not ripe it is very small in all its dimensions, but in women 
whose terms flow in great quantities, and such as frequently 
use copulation, it is much larger, and if they have had children, 
it is larger in them than in such as have had none; but 
in women of a good stature and well shaped, it is (as I have 

110 



The Works of Aristotle 

said before), from the entry of the privy parts to the bottom 
of the womb usually about eight inches; but the length of 
the body of the womb alone, does not exceed three; the 
breadth thereof is near about the same, and of the thickness 
of the little finger, when the womb is not pregnant, but when 
the woman is with child, it becomes of a prodigious greatness, 
and the nearer she is to delivery, the more the womb is 
extended. 

It is not without reason then, that nature (or the God of 
Nature) has made the womb of a membranous substance; 
for thereby it does the easier open to conceive, is gradually 
dilated by the growth of the foetus or young one, and is 
afterwards contracted or closed again, to thrust forth both it 
and the after-burden, and then to retire to its primitive seat. 
Hence also it is enabled to expel any noxious humours, which 
may sometimes happen to be contained within it. 

Before I have done with the womb, which is the field of 
generation, and ought, therefore, to be the more particularly 
taken care of (for as the seeds of plants can produce no plants, 
nor sprig unless grown in ground proper to excite and awaken 
their vegetative virtue so likewise the seed of man, though 

potentially containing all the parts of the child, would never 
produce so admissible an effect, if it were not cast into that 
fruitful field of nature, the womb) I shall proceed to a more 
particular description of its parts, and the uses for which 
nature has designed them. 

The womb, then, is composed of various similar parts, that 
is of membranes, veins, arteries and nerves. Its membranes are 
two and they compose the principal parts of the body, the 
outermost of which ariseth from the peritoneum or caul, and 
is very thin, without it is smooth, but within equal, that it 
may the better cleave to the womb, as it is fleshier and thicker 
than anything else we meet with within the body, when the 
woman is not pregnant, and is interwoven with all sorts of 
fibres or small strings that it may the better suffer the extension 
of the child, and the water caused during pregnancy, and 
also that it may the easier close again after delivery. 

The veins and arteries proceed both from the hypogastric 
and the spermatic vessels, of which I shall speak by and by; 
all these are inserted and terminated in the proper membranes 
of the womb. The arteries supply it with food and 
nourishment, which being brought together in too great a 

111 



The Works of Aristotle 

quantity, sweats through the substance of it, and distils as it 
were a dew at the bottom of the cavity; from thence proceed 
the terms in ripe virgins, and the blood which nourisheth 
the embryo in breeding women. The branches which issue 
from the spermatic vessels, are inserted on each side of the 
bottom of the womb, and are much less than those which 
proceed from the hypogastrics, those being greater and 
bedewing the whole substance of it. There are some other 
small vessels, which arising the one from the other are conducted 
to the internal orifice, and by these, those that are 
pregnant purge away the superfluity of the terms when they 
happen to have more than is used in the nourishment of the 
infant: by which means nature has taken so much care of the 
womb, that during pregnancy it shall not be obliged to open 
itself for passing away those excrementitious humours, which, 
should it be forced to do, might often endanger abortion. 

As touching the nerves, they proceed from the brain, which 
furnishes all the inner parts of the lower belly in them, which 
is the true reason it hath so great a sympathy with the stomach, 
which is likewise very considerably furnished from the 
same part; so that the womb cannot be afflicted with any 

pain, but that the stomach is immediately sensible thereof, 
which is the cause of those loathings or frequent vomitings 
which happen to it. 

But beside all these parts which compose the womb, it has 
yet four ligaments, whose office it is, to keep it firm in its 
place, and prevent its constant agitation, by the continual 
motion of the intestines which surround it, two of which are 
above and two below. Those above are called the broad ligaments, 
because of their broad and membranous figure, and 
are nothing else but the production of the peritoneum which 
growing out of the sides of the loins towards the veins come 
to be inserted in the sides of the bottom of the womb, to 
hinder the body from bearing too much on the neck, and so 
from suffering a precipitation as will sometimes happen when 
the ligaments are too much relaxed; and do also contain the 
testicles, and as well, safely conduct the different vessels, as 
the ejaculatories, to the womb. The lowermost are called 
round ligaments, taking their origin from the side of the 
womb near the horn, from whence they pass the groin, together 
with the production of the peritoneum, which accompanies 
them through the rings of the oblique and trans


112 



The Works of Aristotle 

verse muscles of the belly, by which they divide themselves 
into many little branches resembling the foot of a goose, of 
which some are inserted into the os pubis, the rest are lost 
and confounded with the membranes which women and 
children feel in their thighs. These two ligaments are long, 
round and nervous, and pretty big in their beginning near 
the matrix, hollow in their rise, and all along the os pubis, 
where they are a little smaller and become flat, the better to 
be inserted in the manner aforesaid. It is by their means the 
womb is hindered from rising too high. Now, although the 
womb is held in its natural situation by means of these four 
ligaments, it has liberty enough to extend itself when pregnant, 
because they are very loose, and so easily yield to its 
distension. But besides these ligaments, which keep the 
womb, as it were, in a poise, yet it is fastened for greater 
security by its neck, both to the bladder and rectum, between 
which it is situated. Whence it comes to pass, that if 
at any time the womb be inflamed, it communicates the inflammation 
to the neighbouring part. 

Its use or proper action in the work of generation, is to 
receive and retain the seed, and deduce from it power and 

action by its heat, for the generation of the infant; and it is, 
therefore, absolutely necessary for the conservation of the 
species. It also seems by accident to receive and expel the 
impurities of the whole body, as when women have abundance 
of whites, and to purge away, from time to time, the 
superfluity of the blood, as when a woman is not with child. 

SECT. II.—Of the difference between the ancient and modern 
Physicians, touching the woman’s contributing seed for 
the Formation of the Child. 

Our modern anatomists and physicians are of different sentiments 
from the ancients touching the woman’s contributing 
seed for the formation of the child, as well as the man; 
the ancients strongly affirming it, but our modern authors 
being generally of another judgment. I will not make myself 
a party to this controversy, but set down impartially, yet 
briefly, the arguments on each side, and leave the judicious 
reader to judge for himself. 

Though it is apparent, say the ancients, that the seed of 

113 



The Works of Aristotle 

man is the principal efficient and beginning of action, motion 
and generation, yet the woman affords seed, and contributes 
to the procreation of the child, it is evident from 
hence, that the woman had seminal vessels, which had been 
given her in vain if she wanted seminal excretions; but since 
nature forms nothing in vain, it must be granted that they 
were formed for the use of the seed and procreation, and 
fixed in their proper places, to operate and contribute virtue 
and efficiency to the seed; and this, say they, is further proved 
from hence, that if women at years of maturity use not copulation 
to eject their seed, they often fall into strange diseases, 
as appears by young women and virgins, and also it appears 
that, women are never better pleased than when they are 
often satisfied this way, which argues, that the pleasure and 
delight, say they, is double in women to what it is in men, 
for as the delight of men in copulation consists chiefly in the 
emission of the seed, so women are delighted, both in the 
emission of their own and the reception of the man’s. 

But against this, all our modern authors affirm that the 
ancients are very erroneous, inasmuch as the testicles in 
women do not afford seed, but are two eggs, like those of a 

fowl or other creatures; neither have they any such offices as 
in men, but are indeed an ovarium, or receptacle for eggs, 
wherein these eggs are nourished, by the sanguinary vessels 
dispersed through them; and from hence one or more, as 
they are fecundated by the man’s seed, are conveyed into the 
womb by the oviducts. And the truth of this, say they, is so 
plain, that if you boil them, the liquor shall have the same 
taste, colour and consistency with the taste of bird’s eggs. 
And if it be objected that they have no shells, the answer is 
easy; for the eggs of fowls while they are in the ovary, nay, 
after they have fallen into the uterus, have no shell: and 
though they have one when they are laid, yet it is no more 
than a fence which nature has provided for them against 
outward injuries, they being hatched without the body, but 
those of women being hatched within the body have no need 
of any other fence than the womb to secure them. 

They also further say, that there are in the generation of 
the foetus, or young ones, two principles, active and passive; 
the active is the man’s seed elaborated in the testicles out of 
the arterial blood and animal spirits; the passive principle is 
the ovum or egg, impregnated by the man’s seed; for to say 

114 



The Works of Aristotle 

that women have true seed, say they, is erroneous. But the 
manner of conception is this; the most spirituous part of the 
man’s seed, in the act of copulation, reaching up to the 
ovarium or testicles of the woman (which contains divers 
eggs, sometimes fewer) impregnates one of them; which, 
being conveyed by the oviducts to the bottom of the womb, 
presently begins to swell bigger and bigger, and drinks in the 
moisture that is so plentifully sent hither, after the same 
manner that the seed in the ground suck the fertile moisture 
thereof, to make them sprout. 

But, notwithstanding what is here urged by modern anatomists, 
there are some late writers of the opinion of the ancients, 
viz., that women both have, and emit seed in the act 
of copulation; and even women themselves take it ill to be 
thought merely passive in the act wherein they make such 
vigorous exertions; and positively affirm, that they are sensible 
of the emission of their seed in that action, and that in 
it a great part of the delight which they take in that act, 
consists. I shall not, therefore, go about to take away any of 
their happiness from them, but leave them in possession of 
their imaginary felicity. 

Having thus laid the foundation of this work, I will now 
proceed to speak of conception, and of those things which 
are necessary to be observed by women from the time of 
their conception, to the time of their delivery. 

115 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER II 

Of Conception; what it is; how women are to 
order themselves after Conception 

SECTION I.—What Conception is, and the qualifications 
requisite thereto. 

CONCEPTION IS NOTHING but an action of the womb, by which 
the prolific seed is received and retained, that an infant may 
be engendered and formed out of it. There are two sorts of 
conception: the one according to nature, which is followed 
by the generation of the infant in the womb; the other false 
and wholly against nature, in which the seed changes into 
water, and produces only false conceptions, moles, or other 
strange matter. Now, there are three things principally necessary 
in order to a true conception, so that generation may 
follow, viz., without diversity of sex there can be no conception; 
for, though some will have a woman to be an animal 
that can engender of herself, it is a great mistake; there can 
be no conception without a man discharge his seed into the 

womb. What they allege of pullets laying eggs without a cock’s 
treading them is nothing to the purpose, for those eggs should 
they be set under a hen, will never become chickens because 
they never received any prolific virtue from the male, which 
is absolutely necessary to this purpose, and is sufficient to 
convince us, that diversity of the sex is necessary even to 
those animals, as well as to the generation of man. But diversity 
of sex, though it be necessary to conception, yet it will 
not do alone; there must also be a congression of the different 
sexes; for diversity of sex would profit little if copulation 
did not follow. I confess I have heard of subtle women, who, 
to cover their sin and shame, have endeavoured to persuade 
some peasants that they were never touched by man to get 
them with child; and that one in particular pretended to 
conceive by going into a bath where a man had washed himself 
a little before and spent his seed in it, which was drawn 
and sucked into her womb, as she pretended. But such stories 
as these are only for such who know no better. Now that 
these different sexes should be obliged to come to the touch, 
which we call copulation or coition, besides the natural desire 
of begetting their like, which stirs up men and women 

116 



The Works of Aristotle 

to it, the parts appointed for generation are endowed by nature 
with a delightful and mutual itch, which begets in them 
a desire to the action; without which, it would not be very 
easy for a man, born for the contemplation of divine mysteries, 
to join himself, by the way of coition, to a woman, in 
regard to the uncleanness of the part and the action. And, 
on the other side, if the woman did but think of those pains 
and inconveniences to which they are subject by their great 
bellies, and those hazards of life itself, besides the unavoidable 
pains that attend their delivery, it is reasonable to believe 
they would be affrighted from it. But neither sex makes 
these reflections till after the action is over, considering nothing 
beforehand but the pleasure of the enjoyment, so that it 
is from this voluptuous itch that nature obliges both sexes to 
this congression. Upon which the third thing followeth of 
course, viz., the emission of seed into the womb in the act of 
copulation. For the woman having received this prolific seed 
into her womb, and retained it there, the womb thereupon 
becomes depressed, and embraces the seed so closely, that 
being closed the point of a needle cannot enter into it without 
violence. And now the woman may be said to have con


ceived, having reduced by her heat from power into action, 
the several faculties which are contained in the seed, making 
use of the spirits with which the seed abounds, and which 
are the instruments which begin to trace out the first lineaments 
of the parts, and which afterwards, by making use of 
the menstruous blood flowing to it, give it, in time, growth 
and final perfection. And thus much shall suffice to explain 
what conception is. I shall next proceed to show 

SECT. II.—How a Woman ought to order herself after Conception. 


My design in this treatise being brevity, I shall bring forward 
a little of what the learned have said of the causes of twins, 
and whether there be any such things as superfoetations, or 
a second conception in a woman (which is yet common 
enough), and as to twins, I shall have occasion to speak of 
them when I come to show you how the midwife ought to 
proceed in the delivery of the women that are pregnant with 
them. But having already spoken of conception, I think it 

117 



The Works of Aristotle 

now necessary to show how such as have conceived ought to 
order themselves during their pregnancy, that they may avoid 
those inconveniences, which often endanger the life of the 
child and many times their own. 

A woman, after conception, during the time of her being 
with child, ought to be looked upon as indisposed or sick, 
though in good health; for child bearing is a kind of nine 
months’ sickness, being all that time in expectation of many 
inconveniences which such a condition usually causes to those 
that are not well governed during that time; and therefore, 
ought to resemble a good pilot, who, when sailing on a rough 
sea and full of rocks, avoids and shuns the danger, if he steers 
with prudence, but if not, it is a thousand to one but he 
suffers shipwreck. In like manner, a woman with child is 
often in danger of miscarrying and losing her life, if she is 
not very careful to prevent those accidents to which she is 
subject all the time of her pregnancy. All which time her care 
must be double, first of herself, and secondly of the child she 
goes with for otherwise, a single error may produce a double 
mischief; for if she receives a prejudice, the child also suffers 
with her. Let a woman, therefore, after conception, observe 

a good diet, suitable to her temperament, custom, condition 
and quality; and if she can, let the air where she ordinarily 
dwells be clear and well tempered, and free from extremes, 
either of heat or cold; for being too hot, it dissipateth the 
spirits too much and causes many weaknesses; and by being 
too cold and foggy, it may bring down rheums and distillations 
on the lungs, and so cause her to cough, which, by its 
impetuous motion, forcing downwards, may make her miscarry. 
She ought alway to avoid all nauseous and ill smells; 
for sometimes the stench of a candle, not well put out, may 
cause her to come before time; and I have known the smell 
of charcoal to have the same effect. Let her also avoid smelling 
of rue, mint, pennyroyal, castor, brimstone, etc. 

But, with respect to their diet, women with child have generally 
so great loathings and so many different longings, that 
it is very difficult to prescribe an exact diet for them. Only 
this I think advisable, that they may use those meats and 
drinks which are to them most desirable, though, perhaps, 
not in themselves so wholesome as some others, and, it may 
be not so pleasant; but this liberty must be made use of with 
this caution, that what they desire be not in itself unwhole


118 



The Works of Aristotle 

some; and also that in everything they take care of excess. 
But, if a child-bearing woman finds herself not troubled with 
such longings as we have spoken of, let her take simple food, 
and in such quantity as may be sufficient for herself and the 
child, which her appetite may in a great measure regulate; 
for it is alike hurtful to her to fast too long as to eat too 
much; and therefore, rather let her eat a little and often; especially 
let her avoid eating too much at night, because the 
stomach being too much filled, compresseth the diaphragm, 
and thereby causeth difficulty of breathing. Let her meat be 
easy of digestion, such as the tenderest parts of beef, mutton, 
veal, fowls, pullets, capons, pigeons and partridges, either 
boiled or roasted, as she likes best, new laid eggs are also 
very good for her; and let her put into her broth those herbs 
that purify it, as sorrel, lettuce, succory and borage; for they 
will purge and purify the blood. Let her avoid whatever is 
hot seasoned, especially pies and baked meats, which being 
of hot digestion, overcharge the stomach. If she desire fish 
let it be fresh, and such as is taken out of rivers and running 
streams. Let her eat quinces and marmalade, to strengthen 
her child: for which purpose sweet almonds, honey, sweet 

apples, and full ripe grapes, are also good. Let her abstain 
from all salt, sour, bitter and salt things, and all things that 
tend to provoke the terms—such as garlic, onions, mustard, 
fennel, pepper and all spices except cinnamon, which in the 
last three months is good for her. If at first her diet be sparing, 
as she increases in bigness, let her diet be increased, for 
she ought to consider that she has a child as well as herself to 
nourish. Let her be moderate in her drinking; and if she 
drinks wine, let it be rather claret than white (for it will breed 
good blood, help the digestion, and comfort the stomach, 
which is weakly during pregnancy); but white wine being 
diuretic, or that which provokes urine, ought to be avoided. 
Let her be careful not to take too much exercise, and let her 
avoid dancing, riding in a coach, or whatever else puts the 
body into violent motion, especially in the first month. But 
to be more particular, I shall here set down rules proper for 
every month for the child-bearing woman to order herself, 
from the time she first conceived, to the time of her delivery. 

119 



The Works of Aristotle 

Rules for the First Two Months 

As soon as a woman knows, or has reason to believe, that she 
has conceived, she ought to abstain from all violent motions 
and exercise; whether she walks afoot, or rides on horseback 
or in a coach, it ought to be very gently. Let her also abstain 
from Venery (for which, after conception, she has usually no 
great inclination), lest there be a mole or superfoetation, 
which is the adding of one embryo to another. Let her beware 
not to lift her arms too high, nor carry great burdens, 
nor repose herself on hard and uneasy seats. Let her use 
moderately good, juicy meat and easy of digestion, and let 
her wines be neither too strong nor too sharp, but a little 
mingled with water; or if she be very abstemious, she may 
use water wherein cinnamon has been boiled. Let her avoid 
fastings, thirst, watchings, mourning, sadness, anger, and all 
other perturbations of the mind. Let no one present any 
strange or unwholesome thing to her, nor so much as name 
it, lest she should desire it and not be able to get it, and so 
either cause her to miscarry, or the child to have some deformity 
on that account. Let her belly be kept loose with prunes, 

raisins or manna in her broth, and let her use the following 
electuary, to strengthen the womb and the child— 

“Take conserve of borage, buglos and roses, each two 
ounces; an ounce of balm; an ounce each of citron peel and 
shreds, candied mirobalans, an ounce each; extract of wood 
aloes a scruple; prepared pearl, half a drachm; red coral and 
ivory, of each a drachm; precious stones each a scruple; candied 
nutmegs, two drachms, and with syrup of apples and 
quinces make an electuary.” 

Let her observe the following rules 

“Take pearls prepared, a drachm; red coral and ivory prepared, 
each half a drachm, precious stones, each a scruple; 
yellow citron peel, mace, cinnamon, cloves, each half a 
drachm; saffron, a scruple; wood aloes, half a scruple; ambergris, 
six drachms; and with six ounces of sugar dissolved 
in rosewater make rolls.” Let her also apply strengtheners of 
nutmeg, mace and mastich made up in bags, to the navel, or 
a toast dipped in malmsey, or sprinkled with powdered mint. 

120 



The Works of Aristotle 

If she happens to desire clay, chalk, or coals (as many women 
with child do), give her beans boiled with sugar, and if she 
happens to long for anything that she cannot obtain, let her 
presently drink a large draught of pure cold water. 

Rules for the Third Month 

In this month and the next, be sure to keep from bleeding; 
for though it may be safe and proper at other times, yet it 
will not be so at the end of the fourth month; and yet if 
blood abound, or some incidental disease happens which 
requires evacuation, you may use a cupping glass, with scarification, 
and a little blood may be drawn from the shoulders 
and arms, especially if she has been accustomed to bleed. Let 
her also take care of lacing herself too straitly, but give herself 
more liberty than she used to do; for inclosing her belly 
in too strait a mould, she hinders the infant from taking its 
free growth, and often makes it come before its time. 

Rules for the Fourth Month 

In this month also you ought to keep the child-bearing 
woman from bleeding, unless in extraordinary cases, but 
when the month is passed, blood-letting and physic may be 
permitted, if it be gentle and mild, and perhaps it may be 
necessary to prevent abortion. In this month she may purge, 
in an acute disease, but purging may only be used from the 
beginning of this month to the end of the sixth; but let her 
take care that in purging she use no vehement medicine, nor 
any bitter, as aloes, which is disagreeable and hurtful to the 
child, and opens the mouth of the vessels; neither let her use 
coloquintida, scammony nor turbith; she may use cassia, 
manna, rhubarb, agaric and senna but dyacidodium purgans 
is best, with a little of the electuary of the juice of roses. 

Rules for the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Months 

In these months, child-bearing women are troubled with 
coughs, colds, heart-beating, fainting, watching, pains in the 

121 



The Works of Aristotle 

loins and hips, and bleeding. The cough is from a sharp 
vapour that comes to the jaws and rough artery from the 
terms, or the thin part of that blood got less into the reins of 
the breast; this endangers abortion, and strength fails from 
watching: therefore, purge the humours that come to the 
breast, with rhubarb and agaric, and strengthen the head as 
in a catarrh, and give sweet lenitives as in a cough. Palpitation 
and faintness arises from vapours that go to it by the 
arteries, or from blood that abounds and cannot get out of 
the womb, but ascends and oppresses the heart; and in this 
case cordials should be used both inwardly and outwardly. 
Watching, is from sharp dry vapours that trouble the animal 
spirits, and in this case use frictions, and let the woman wash 
her feet at bed-time, and let her take syrup of poppies, dried 
roses, emulsions of sweet almonds, and white poppy seed. If 
she be troubled with pains in her loins and hips, as in those 
months she is subject to be, from the weight of her child as it 
grows big and heavy, and so stretches the ligaments of the 
womb and part adjacent, let her hold it up with swathing 
bands about her neck. About this time also the woman often 
happens to have a flux of blood, either at the nose, womb or 

haemorrhoids, from plenty of blood, or from the weakness 
of the child that takes it not in, or else from evil humour in 
the blood, that stirs up nature and sends it forth. And sometimes 
it happens that the vessels of the womb may be broken, 
either by some violent motion, fall, cough or trouble of 
the mind (for any of these will work that effect), and this is 
so dangerous, that in such a case the child cannot be well, 
but if it be from blood only, the danger is less, provided it 
flows by the veins of the neck of the womb, for then it prevents 
plethora and takes not away the nourishment of the 
child; but if it proceeds from the weakness of the child, that 
draws it not in, abortion of the child often follows, or hard 
travail, or else she goes beyond her time. But if it flows from 
the inward veins of the womb, there is more danger by the 
openness of the womb, if it come from evil blood; the danger 
is alike from cacochymy, which is like to fall upon both. 
If it arises from plethora, open a vein, but with great caution, 
and use astringents, of which the following will do 
well:—Take prepared pearls, a scruple; red coral, two scruples; 
mace, nutmeg, each a drachm; cinnamon, half a drachm; 
make a powder, or with white sugar make rolls. Or give this 

122 



The Works of Aristotle 

powder in broth:—“Take red coral, a drachm; half a drachm 
precious stones; red sander, half a drachm; bole, a drachm; 
scaled earth and tormental roots, each two scruples, with 
sugar of roses and Manus Christi; with pearl, five drachms; 
make a powder.” You may also strengthen the child at the 
navel, and if there be a cacochymy, alter the humours, and if 
you can do it safely, evacuate; you may likewise use amulets 
on her hands and about her neck. In a flux of haemorrhoids, 
wear off the pain, and let her drink hot wine with a toasted 
nutmeg. In these months the belly is also subject to be bound, 
but if it be without any apparent disease, the broth of a 
chicken or veal, sodden with oil, or with the decoction of 
mallows or marsh-mallows, mercury or linseed, put up in a 
clyster, will not be amiss, but in less quantity than is given in 
other cases:—viz. of the decoction, five ounces, of common 
oil, three ounces, of sugar, two ounces, and of cassia fistula, 
one ounce. But if she will not take a clyster, one or two yolks 
of new laid eggs, or a little peas-pottage warm, a little salt 
and sugar, and supped a little before meat, will be very convenient. 
But if her belly be distended and stretched with wind 
a little fennel seed and aniseed reduced to a powder and mixed 

with honey and sugar made after the manner of an electuary, 
will be very well Also, if thighs and feet swell let them be 
anointed with erphodrinum (which is a liquid medicine) 
made with vinegar and rose-water, mingled with salt. 

Rules for the Eighth Month 

The eighth month is commonly called the most dangerous; 
therefore the greatest care and caution ought to be used, the 
diet better in quality, but no more, nor indeed, so much in 
quantity as before, but as she must abate her diet, she must 
increase her exercise; and because then women with child, by 
reason that sharp humours alter the belly, are accustomed to 
weaken their spirits and strength, they may well take before 
meat, an electuary of diarrhoden, or aromaticum rosatum or 
diamagarton; and sometimes they may lick a little honey. As 
they will loathe, nauseate their meat, they may take green ginger, 
candied with sugar, and the rinds of citron and oranges 
candied; and let them often use honey for strengthening the 
infant. When she is not very far from her labour, let her eat 

123 



The Works of Aristotle 

every day seven roasted figs before her meat, and sometimes 
let her lick a little honey. But let her beware of salt and powdered 
meat, for it is neither good for her nor the child. 

Rules for the Ninth Month 

In the ninth month let her have a care of lifting any great 
weight, but let her move a little more, to dilate the parts, and 
stir up natural heat. Let her take heed of stooping, and neither 
sit too much nor lie on her sides, neither ought she to bend 
herself much enfolded in the umbilical ligaments, by which 
means it often perisheth. Let her walk and stir often, and let 
her exercise be, rather to go upwards than downwards. Let her 
diet, now especially, be light and easy of digestion and damask 
prunes with sugar, or figs with raisins, before meat, as also the 
yolks of eggs, flesh and broth of chickens, birds, partridges 
and pheasants; astringent and roasted meats, with rice, hard 
eggs, millet and such like other things are proper. Baths of 
sweet water, with emollient herbs, ought to be used by her this 
month with some intermission, and after the baths let her 

belly be anointed with oil of sweet roses and of violets; but for 
her privy parts, it is better to anoint them with the fat of hens, 
geese or ducks, or with oil of lilies, and the decoction of linseed 
and fenugreek, boiled with oil of linseed and marshmallows, 
or with the following liniment:— 

Take mallows and marshmallows, cut and shred, of each 
one ounce; of linseed, one ounce; let them be boiled from 
twenty ounces of water to ten; then let her take three ounces 
of the boiled broth, of oil of almonds and oil of flower-deluce, 
of each one ounce; of deer’s suet, three ounces. Let her 
bathe with this, and anoint herself with it, warm. 

If for fourteen days before the birth, she do every morning 
and evening bathe and moisten her belly with muscadine 
and lavender water, the child will be much strengthened 
thereby. And if every day she eat toasted bread, it will hinder 
anything from growing to the child. Her privy parts must be 
gently stroked down with this fomentation. 

“Take three ounces of linseed, and one handful each of 
mallows and marshmallows sliced, then let them be put into 
a bag and immediately boiled.” Let the woman with child, 
every morning and evening, take the vapour of this decoc


124 



The Works of Aristotle 

tion in a hollow stool, taking great heed that no wind or air 
come to her in-parts, and then let her wipe the part so 
anointed with a linen cloth, and she may anoint the belly 
and groins as at first. 

When she has come so near to her time, as to be ten or 
fourteen days thereof, if she begins to feel any more than 
ordinary pain let her use every day the following:—”Take 
mallows and marshmallows, of each a handful; camomiles, 
hard mercury, maidenhair, of each a handful; of linseed, four 
ounces; let them be boiled in a sufficient quantity of water as 
to make a bath therewith.” But let her not sit too hot upon 
the seat, nor higher than a little above her navel; nor let her 
sit upon it longer than about half an hour, lest her strength 
languish and decay, for it is better to use it often than to stay 
too long in it. 

And thus have I shown how a child-bearing woman ought 
to govern herself each month during her pregnancy. How 
she must order herself at her delivery, shall be shown in another 
chapter, after I have first shown the intended midwife 
how the child is first formed in the womb, and the manner 
of its decumbiture there. 

CHAPTER III 

Of the Parts proper to a Child in the womb; How it is 

formed there, and the manner of its Situation therein 

IN THE LAST CHAPTER I treated of conception, showed what it 
was, how accomplished and its signs, and how she who has 
conceived ought to order herself during the time of her pregnancy. 
Now, before I come to speak of her delivery, it is necessary 
that the midwife be first made acquainted with the 
parts proper to a child in the womb, and also that she be 
shown how it is formed, and the manner of its situation and 
decumbiture there; which are so necessary to her, that without 
the knowledge thereof, no one can tell how to deliver a 
woman as she ought. This, therefore, shall be the work of 
this chapter. I shall begin with the first of these. 

125 



The Works of Aristotle 

SECTION I.—Of the Parts proper to a Child in the Womb. 

In this section, I must first tell you what I mean by the parts 
proper to a child in the womb; and they are only those that 
either help or nourish it; and whilst it is lodged in that dark 
repository of nature, and that help to clothe and defend it 
there and are cast away, as of no more use, after it is born, 
and these are two, viz., the umbilicars, or navel vessels, and 
the secundinum. By the first it is nourished, and by the second 
clothed and defended from wrong. Of each of these I 
shall speak distinctly; and first, 

Of the Umbilicars, or Navel Vessels 

These are four in number, viz.:—one vein, two arteries, and 
the vessel which is called the urachos. 

(1) The vein is that on which the infant is nourished, from 
the time of its conception till the time of its delivery; till 
being brought into the light of the world, it has the same 
way of concocting the food we have. This vein ariseth from 
the liver of the child, and is divided into two parts when it 
has passed the navel; and these two are divided and subdivided, 
the branches being upheld by the skin called chorion 
(of which I speak by and by), and are joined to the veins of 
the mother’s womb, from whence they have their blood for 
the nourishment of the child. 

(2) The arteries are two on each side which proceed from the 
back branches of the great artery of the mother, and the vital 
blood is carried by those to the child being ready concocted 
by the mother. 
(3) A nervous or sinewy production is led from the bottom 
of the bladder of the infant to the navel, and this is called 
urachos, and its use is, to convey the urine of the infant from 
the bladder to the alantois. Anatomists do very much vary in 
their opinion concerning this, some denying any such thing 
to be in the delivery of the woman, and others on the contrary 
affirming it; but experience has testified there is such a 
thing, for Bartholomew Carbrolius, the ordinary doctor of 
126 



The Works of Aristotle 

anatomy to the College of Physicians at Montpellier in 
France, records the history of a maid, whose water being a 
long time stopped, at last issued out through the navel. And 
Johannes Fernelius speaks of the same thing that happened 
to a man of thirty years of age, who having a stoppage at the 
neck of the bladder, his urine issued out of his navel for many 
months together, and that without any prejudice at all to his 
health, which he ascribes to the ill lying of his navel, whereby 
the urachos was not well dried. And Volchier Coitas quotes 
such another instance in a maid of thirty-four at Nuremburg 
in Germany. These instances, though they happen but seldom, 
are sufficient to prove that there is such a thing as 
anurachos in men. 

These four vessels before mentioned, viz., one vein, two 
arteries and the urachos, join near the navel, and are united 
by a skin which they have from the chorion and so become 
like a gut or rope, and are altogether void of sensibility, and 
this is that which women call the navel-string. The vessels 
are thus joined together, that so they may neither be broken, 
severed nor entangled; and when the infant is born are of no 
use save only to make up the ligament which stops the hole 

of the navel and for some other physical use, etc. 

Of the Secundine or After-birth 

Setting aside the name given to this by the Greeks and Latins, 
it is called in English by the name of secundine, afterbirth 
or after-burden; which are held to be four in number. 

(1) The first is called placenta, because it resembles the form 
of a cake, and is knit both to the navel and chorion, and 
makes up the greatest part of the secundine or after-birth. 
The flesh of it is like that of the melt or spleen, soft, red and 
tending something to blackness, and hath many small veins 
and arteries in it: and certainly the chief use of it is, for containing 
the child in the womb. 
(2) The second is the chorion. This skin and that called the 
amnios, involve the child round, both above and underneath, 
and on both sides, which the alantois does not. This skin is 
that which is most commonly called the secundine, as it is 
127 



The Works of Aristotle 

thick and white garnished with many small veins and arteries, 
ending in the placenta before named, being very light 
and slippery. Its use is, not only to cover the child round 
about, but also to receive, and safely bind up the roots of the 
veins and arteries or navel vessels before described. 

(3) The third thing which makes up the secundine in the 
alantois, of which there is a great dispute amongst anatomists. 
Some say there is such a thing, and others that there is 
not. Those who will have it to be a membrane, say it is white, 
soft and exceedingly thin, and just under the placenta, where 
it is knit to the urachos, from which it receives the urine; 
and its office is to keep it separate from the sweat, that the 
saltness of it may not offend the tender skin of the child. 
(4) The fourth, and last covering of the child is called amnios; 
and it is white, soft and transparent, being nourished by some 
very small veins and arteries. Its use is, not only to enwrap 
the child, but also to retain the sweat of the child. 
Having thus described the parts proper to a child in the 

womb, I will next proceed to speak of the formation of the 
child therein, as soon as I have explained the hard terms of 
the section, that those for whose help it is designed, may 
understand what they read. A vein is that which receives blood 
from the liver, and distributes in several branches to all parts 
of the body. Nerve is the same with sinew, and is that by 
which the brain adds sense and motion to the body. Placenta, 
properly signifies sugar cake; but in this section it is 
used to signify a spongy piece of flesh resembling a cake, full 
of veins and arteries, and is made to receive a mother’s blood 
appointed for the infant’s nourishment in the womb. The 
chorion is an outward skin which compasseth the child in 
the womb. The amnios is the inner skin which compasseth 
the child in the womb. The alantois is the skin that holds the 
urine of the child during the time that it abides in the womb. 
The urachos is the vessel that conveys the urine from the 
child in the womb to the alantois. I now proceed to 

128 



The Works of Aristotle 

SECT. II.—Of the Formation of the Child in the Womb. 

To speak of the formation of the child in the womb, we must 
begin where nature begins, and, that is at the act of coition, in 
which the womb having received the generative seed (without 
which there can be no conception), the womb immediately 
shuts up itself so close that the point of a needle cannot enter 
the inward orifice; and this it does, partly to hinder the issuing 
out of the seed again, and partly to cherish it by an inward 
heat, the better to provoke it to action; which is one reason 
why women’s bellies are so lank at their first conception. The 
woman having thus conceived, the first thing which is operative 
in conception is the spirit whereof the seed is full, which, 
nature quickening by the heat of the womb, stirs up the action. 
The internal spirits, therefore, separate the parts that are 
less pure, which are thick, cold and clammy, from those that 
are more pure and noble. The less pure are cast to the outside, 
and with these seed is circled round and the membrane made, 
in which that seed that is most pure is wrapped round and 
kept close together, that it may be defended from cold and 
other accidents, and operate the better. 

The first thing that is formed is the amnios; the next the 
chorion; and they enwrap the seed round like a curtain. Soon 
after this (for the seed thus shut up in the woman lies not 
idle), the navel vein is bred, which pierceth those skins, being 
yet very tender, and carries a drop of blood from the 
veins of the mother’s womb to the seed; from which drop 
the vena cava, or chief vein, proceeds, from which all the rest 
of the veins which nourish the body spring; and now the 
seed hath something to nourish it, whilst it performs the rest 
of nature’s work, and also blood administered to every part 
of it, to form flesh. 

This vein being formed, the navel arteries are soon after 
formed; then the great artery, of which all the others are but 
branches; and then the heart, for the liver furnisheth the 
arteries with blood to form the heart, the arteries being made 
of seed, but the heart and the flesh, of blood. After this the 
brain is formed, and then the nerves to give sense and motion 
to the infant. Afterwards the bones and flesh are formed; 
and of the bones, first of all, the vertebrae or chine bones, 
and then the skull, etc. As to the time in which this curious 
part of nature’s workmanship is formed, having already in 

129 



The Works of Aristotle 

Chapter II of the former part of this work spoken at large 
upon this point, and also of the nourishment of the child in 
the womb, I shall here only refer the reader thereto, and proceed 
to show the manner in which the child lies in the womb. 

SECT. III.—Of the manner of the Child’s lying in the Womb. 

This is a thing so essential for a midwife to know, that she 
can be no midwife who is ignorant of it; and yet even about 
this authors extremely differ; for there are not two in ten 
that agree what is the form that the child lies in the womb, 
or in what fashion it lies there; and yet this may arise in a 
great measure from the different times of the women’s pregnancy; 
for near the time of its deliverance out of those winding 
chambers of nature it oftentimes changes the form in 
which it lay before, for another. 

I will now show the several situations of the child in the 
mother’s womb, according to the different times of pregnancy, 
by which those that are contrary to nature, and are 
the chief cause of ill labours, will be more easily conceived 

by the understanding midwife. It ought, therefore, in the 
first place to be observed, that the infant, as well male as 
female, is generally situated in the midst of the womb; for 
though sometimes, to appearance a woman’s belly seems 
higher on one side than the other, yet it is so with respect to 
the belly only, and not to her womb, in the midst of which it 
is always placed. 

But, in the second place, a woman’s great belly makes different 
figures, according to the different times of pregnancy; 
for when she is young with child, the embryo is always found 
of a round figure, a little long, a little oblong, having the 
spine moderately turned inwards, and the thighs folded, and 
a little raised, to which the legs are so raised, that the heels 
touch the buttocks; the arms are bending, and the hands 
placed upon the knees, towards which part of the body, the 
head is turned downwards towards the inward orifice of the 
womb, tumbling as it were over its head so that then the feet 
are uppermost, and the face towards the mother’s great gut; 
and this turning of the infant in this manner, with its head 
downwards, towards the latter end of a woman’s reckoning, 
is so ordered by nature, that it may be thereby the better 

130 



The Works of Aristotle 

disposed of its passage into the world at the time of its 
mother’s labour, which is not then far off (and indeed some 
children turn not at all until the very time of birth); for in 
this posture all its joints are most easily extended in coming 
forth; for by this means its arms and legs cannot hinder its 
birth, because they cannot be bent against the inner orifice 
of the womb and the rest of the body, being very supple, 
passeth without any difficulty after the head, which is hard 
and big; being passed the head is inclined forward, so that 
the chin toucheth the breast, in which posture, it resembles 
one sitting to ease nature, and stooping down with the head 
to see what comes from him. The spine of the back is at that 
time placed towards the mother’s, the head uppermost, the 
face downwards; and proportionately to its growth, it extends 
its members by little and little, which were exactly 
folded in the first month. In this posture it usually keeps 
until the seventh or eighth month, and then by a natural 
propensity and disposition of the upper first. It is true there 
are divers children, that lie in the womb in another posture, 
and come to birth with their feet downwards, especially if 
there be twins; for then, by their different motions they do 

so disturb one another, that they seldom come both in the 
same posture at the time of labour, but one will come with 
the head, and another with the feet, or perhaps lie across; 
but sometimes neither of them will come right. But, however 
the child may be situated in the womb, or in whatever 
posture it presents itself at the time of birth, if it be not with 
its head forwards, as I have before described, it is always 
against nature, and the delivery will occasion the more pain 
and danger, and require greater care and skill from the midwife, 
than when the labour is more natural. 

131 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER IV 


A Guide for Women in Travail, showing what is to 
be done when they fall in Labour, in order to their 
Delivery 

THE END OF ALL that we have been treating of is, the bringing 
forth of a child into the world with safety both to the mother 
and the infant, as the whole time of a woman’s pregnancy 
may be termed a kind of labour; for, from the time of the 
conception to the time of her delivery, she labours under 
many difficulties, is subject to many distempers, and in continual 
danger, from one affection or other, till the time of 
birth comes; and when that comes, the greatest labour and 
travail come along with it, insomuch that then all the other 
labours are forgotten, and that only is called the time of her 
labours, and to deliver her safely is the principal business of 
the midwife; and to assist therein, shall be the chief design of 
this chapter. The time of the child’s being ready for its birth, 
when nature endeavours to cast it forth, is that which is properly 
the time of a woman’s labour; nature then labouring to 

be eased of its burden. And since many child-bearing women, 
(especially the first child) are often mistaken in their reckoning 
and so, when they draw near their time take every pain 
they meet with for their labour, which often proves prejudicial 
and troublesome to them, when it is not so, I will in the 
first section of this chapter, set down some signs, by which a 
woman may know when the true time of her labour is come. 

SECTION I.—The Signs of the true Time of a Woman’s Labour. 

When women with child, especially of their first, perceive 
any extraordinary pains in the belly, they immediately send 
for their midwife, as taking it for their labour; and then if 
the midwife be not a skilful and experienced woman, to know 
the time of labour, but takes it for granted without further 
inquiry (for some such there are), and so goes about to put 
her into labour before nature is prepared for it, she may endanger 
the life of both mother and child, by breaking the 
amnios and chorion. These pains, which are often mistaken 
for labour, are removed by warm clothes laid to the belly, 

132 



The Works of Aristotle 

and the application of a clyster or two, by which those pains 
which precede a true labour, are rather furthered than hindered. 
There are also other pains incident to a woman in 
that condition from the flux of the belly, which are easily 
known by the frequent stools that follow them. 

The signs, therefore, of labour, some few days before, are 
that the woman’s belly, which before lay high, sinks down, 
and hinders her from walking so easily as she used to do; also 
there flow from the womb slimy humours, which nature has 
appointed to moisten and smooth the passage that its inward 
orifice may be the more easily dilated when there is 
occasion; which beginning to open at this time, suffers that 
slime to flow away, which proceeds from the Glandules called 
prostata. These are signs preceding the labour; but when she 
is presently falling into labour, the signs are, great pains about 
the region of the reins and loins, which coming and retreating 
by intervals, are answered in the bottom of the belly by 
congruous throes, and sometimes the face is red and inflamed, 
the blood being much heated by the endeavours a woman 
makes to bring forth her child; and likewise, because during 
these strong throes her respiration is intercepted, which causes 

the blood to have recourse to her face; also her privy parts 
are swelled by the infant’s head lying in the birth, which, by 
often thrusting, causes those parts to descend outwards. She 
is much subject to vomiting, which is a good sign of good 
labour and speedy delivery, though by ignorant people 
thought otherwise; for good pains are thereby excited and 
redoubled; which vomiting is excited by the sympathy there 
is between the womb and the stomach. Also, when the birth 
is near, women are troubled with a trembling in the thighs 
and legs, not with cold, like the beginning of an ague fit, but 
with the heat of the whole body, though it must be granted, 
this does not happen always. Also, if the humours which 
then flow from the womb are discoloured with the blood, 
which the midwives call shows, it is an infallible mark of the 
birth being near. And if then the midwife puts up her fingers 
into the neck of the womb, she will find the inner orifice 
dilated; at the opening of which the membranes of the infant, 
containing the waters, present themselves and are 
strongly forced down with each pain she hath; at which time 
one may perceive them sometimes to resist, and then again 
press forward the finger, being more or less hard and ex


133 



The Works of Aristotle 

tended, according as the pains are stronger or weaker. These 
membranes, with the waters in them, when they are before 
the head of the child, midwives call the gathering of the waters, 
resemble to the touch of the fingers those eggs which 
have no shell, but are covered only with a simple membrane. 
After this, the pains still redoubling the membranes are broken 
by a strong impulsation of these waters, which flow away, 
and then the head of the infant is presently felt naked, and 
presents itself at the inward orifice of the womb. When these 
waters come thus away, then the midwife may be assured the 
birth is very near, this being the most certain sign that can 
be; for the amnios alantois, which contained these waters, 
being broken by the pressing forward of the birth, the child 
is no better able to subsist long in the womb afterwards than 
a naked man in a heap of snow. Now, these waters, if the 
child comes presently after them, facilitate the labour by 
making the passage slippery; and therefore, let no midwife 
(as some have foolishly done) endeavour to force away the 
water, for nature knows best when the true time of birth is, 
and therefore retains the waters till that time. But if by accident 
the water breaks away too long before the birth, then 

such things as will hasten it, may be safely administered, and 
what these are, I will show in another section. 

SECT. II.—How a Woman ought to be ordered when the 
time of her labour is come. 

When it is known that the true time of her labour is come by 
the signs laid down in the foregoing, of which those most to 
be relied upon are pains and strong throes in the belly, forcing 
downwards towards the womb, and a dilation of the inward 
orifice, which may be perceived by touching it with 
the finger, and the gathering of the waters before the head of 
the child, and thrusting down the membranes which contain 
them; through which, between the pains, one may in 
some manner with the finger discover the part which presents 
itself (as we have said before), especially if it be the 
head of the child, by its roundness and hardness; I say, if 
these things concur and are evident, the midwife may be 
sure it is the time of the woman’s labour, and care must be 
taken to get all those things that are necessary to comfort her 

134 



The Works of Aristotle 

at that time. And the better to help her, be sure to see that 
she is not tightly laced; you must also give her one strong 
clyster or more, if there be occasion, provided it be done at 
the beginning, and before the child be too forward, for it 
will be difficult for her to receive them afterwards. The benefit 
accruing therefrom will be, that they excite the gut to 
discharge itself of its excrements, so that the rectum being 
emptied there may be the more space for the dilation of the 
passage; likewise to cause the pains to bear the more downward, 
through the endeavours she makes when she is at stool, 
and in the meantime, all other necessary things for her labour 
should be put in order, both for the mother and the child. 
To this end, some get a midwife’s; but a pallet bed, girded, is 
much the best way, placed near the fire, if the season so require, 
which pallet ought to be so placed, that there may be 
easy access to it on every side, that the woman may be the 
more easily assisted, as there is occasion. 

If the woman abounds with blood, to bleed her a little 
more may not be improper, for thereby she will both breathe 
the better, and have her breasts more at liberty, and likewise 
more strength to bear down her pains; and this may be done 

without danger because the child being about ready to be 
born, has no more need of the mother’s blood for its nourishment; 
besides, this evacuation does many times prevent 
her having a fever after delivery. Also, before her delivery, if 
her strength will permit, let her walk up and down her chamber; 
and that she may have strength so to do, it will be necessary 
to give her good strengthening things, such as jelly, 
broth, new laid eggs, or some spoonfuls of burnt wine; and 
let her by all means hold out her pains, bearing them down 
as much as she can, at the time when they take her; and let 
the midwife from time to time touch the inward orifice with 
her finger, to know whether the waters are ready to break 
and whether the birth will follow soon after. Let her also 
anoint the woman’s privities with emollient oil, hog’s grease, 
and fresh butter, if she find they are hard to be dilated. Let 
the midwife, likewise, all the time be near the labouring 
woman, and diligently observe her gestures, complaints, and 
pains, for by this she may guess pretty well how far her labour 
advanceth, because when she changeth her ordinary groans 
into loud cries, it is a sign that the child is near the birth; for 
at the time her pains are greater and more frequent. Let the 

135 



The Works of Aristotle 

woman likewise, by intervals, rest herself upon the bed to 
regain her strength, but not too long, especially if she be 
little, short and thick, for such women have always worse 
labour if they lie long on their beds in their travail. It is better, 
therefore, that she walk about her chamber as long as she 
can, the woman supporting her under the arms, if it be necessary; 
for by this means, the weight of the child causes the inward 
orifices of the womb to dilate the sooner than in bed, 
and if her pains be stronger and more frequent, her labour will 
not be near so long. Let not the labouring woman be concerned 
at those qualms and vomitings which, perhaps, she 
may find come upon her, for they will be much for her advantage 
in the issue, however uneasy she may be for a time, as 
they further her pains and throes by provoking downward. 

When the waters of the child are ready and gathered (which 
may be perceived through the membranes presenting themselves 
to the orifice) to the bigness of the whole dilatation, 
the midwife ought to let them break of themselves, and not, 
like some hasty midwives, who being impatient of the 
woman’s long labour, break them, intending thereby to hasten 
their business, when instead thereof, they retard it; for 

by the too hasty breaking of these waters (which nature designed 
to make the child slip more easy), the passage remains 
dry by which means the pains and throes of the labouring 
woman are less efficacious to bring forth the infant than they 
would otherwise have been. It is, therefore, much the better 
way to let the waters break of themselves; after which the 
midwife may with ease feel the child by that part which first 
presents, and thereby discern whether it comes right, that is, 
with the head foremost, for that is the proper and most natural 
way of the birth. If the head comes right, she will find it big, 
round, hard and equal; but if it be any other part, she will 
find it rugged, unequal, soft and hard, according to the nature 
of the part it is. And this being the true time when a 
woman ought to be delivered, if nature be not wanting to 
perform its office, therefore, when the midwife finds the birth 
thus coming forward let her hasten to assist and deliver it, 
for it ordinarily happens soon after, if it be natural. 

But if it happens, as it sometimes may, that the waters break 
away too long before the birth, in such a case, those things 
which hasten nature may safely be administered. For which 
purpose make use of pennyroyal, dittany, juniper berries, red 

136 



The Works of Aristotle 

coral, betony and feverfew, boiled in white wine, and give a 
drachm of it, or it would be much better to take the juice of 
it when it is in its prime, which is in May, and having clarified 
it, make it into a syrup with double its weight of sugar, 
and keep it all the year, to use when occasion calls for it; 
mugwort used in the same manner is also good in this case; 
also a drachm of cinnamon powder given inwardly profits 
much in this case; and so does tansey broiled and applied to 
the privities; or an oil of it, so, made and used, as you were 
taught before. The stone aetites held to the privities, is of 
extraordinary virtue, and instantly draws away, both child 
and after-burden; but great care must be taken to remove it 
presently, or it will draw forth womb and all; for such is the 
magnetic virtue of this stone that both child and womb follow 
it as readily as iron doth the load-stone or the load-stone 
the north star. 

There are many things that physicians affirm are good in 
this case; among which are an ass’s or horse’s hoof, hung near 
the privities; a piece of red coral hung near the said place. A 
load-stone helps very much, held in the woman’s left hand; 
or the skin cut off a snake, girt about the middle, next to the 

skin. These things are mentioned by Mizaldus, but setting 
those things aside, as not so certain, notwithstanding 
Mizaldus quotes them, the following prescriptions are very 
good to speedy deliverance to women in travail. 

(1) A decoction of white wine made in savory, and drank. 
(2) Take wild tansey, or silver weed, bruise it, and apply to 
the woman’s nostrils. 
(3) Take date stones, and beat them to powder, and let her 
take half a drachm of them in white wine at a time. 
(4) Take parsley and bruise it and press out the juice, and dip 
a linen cloth in it, and put it so dipped into the mouth of the 
womb; it will presently cause the child to come away, though 
it be dead, and it will bring away the after-burden. Also the 
juice of the parsley is a thing of so great virtue (especially 
stone parsley) that being drank by a woman with child, it 
cleanseth not only the womb, but also the child in the womb, 
of all gross humours. 
137 



The Works of Aristotle 

(5) A scruple of castorum in powder, in any convenient liquor, 
is very good to be taken in such a case, and so also is 
two or three drops of castorum in any convenient liquor; or 
eight or nine drops of spirits of myrrh given in any convenient 
liquor, gives speedy deliverance. 
(6) Give a woman in such a case another woman’s milk to 
drink; it will cause speedy delivery, and almost without pain. 
(7) The juice of leeks, being drunk with warm water, highly 
operates to cause speedy delivery. 
(8) Take peony seeds and beat them into a powder, and mix 
the powder with oil, with which oil anoint the privities of 
the woman and child; it will give her deliverance speedily, 
and with less pain than can be imagined. 
(9) Take a swallow’s nest and dissolve it in water, strain it, 
and drink it warm, it gives delivery with great speed and 
much ease. 
Note this also in general, that all that move the terms are 
good for making the delivery easy, such as myrrh, white amber 
in white wine, or lily water, two scruples or a drachm; or 
cassia lignea, dittany, each a drachm; cinnamon, half a 
drachm, saffron, a scruple; give a drachm, or take borax mineral, 
a drachm, and give it in sack; or take cassia lignea, a 
drachm; dittany, amber, of each a drachm; cinnamon, borax, 
of each a drachm and a half; saffron, a scruple, and give 
her half a drachm; or give her some drops of oil of hazel in 
convenient liquor; or two or three drops of oil of cinnamon 
in vervain water. Some prepare the secundine thus:—Take 
the navel-string and dry it in an oven, take two drachms of 
the powder, cinnamon a drachm, saffron half a scruple, with 
the juice of savin make trochisks; give two drachms; or wash 
the secundine in wine and bake it in a pot; then wash it in 
endive water and wine, take half a drachm of it; long pepper, 
galangal, of each half a drachm; plantain and endive seed, of 
each half a drachm; lavender seed, four scruples; make a powder, 
or take laudanum, two drachms; storax, calamite, benzoin, 
of each half a drachm; musk, ambergris each six grains, 
make a powder or trochisks for a fume. Or use pessaries to 

138 



The Works of Aristotle 

provoke the birth; take galbanum dissolved in vinegar, an 
ounce; myrrh, two drachms, with oil of oat make a pessary. 

An Ointment For the Navel 

Take oil of keir, two ounces, juice of savine an ounce, of 
leeks and mercury, each half an ounce; boil them to the consumption 
of the juice; add galbanum dissolved in vinegar, 
half an ounce, myrrh, two drachms, storax liquid a drachm, 
round bitwort, sowbread, cinnamon, saffron, a drachm, with 
wax make an ointment and apply it. 

If the birth be retarded through the weakness of the mother, 
refresh her by applying wine and soap to the nose, confect. 
alkermas. diamarg. 

These things may be applied to help nature in her delivery 
when the child comes to the birth the right way, and yet the 
birth be retarded; but if she finds the child comes the wrong 
way, and that she is not able to deliver the woman as she 
ought to be, by helping nature, and saving both mother and 
child (for it is not enough to lay a woman if it might be done 

any other way with more safety and ease, and less hazard to 
woman and child), then let her send speedily for the better 
and more able to help; and not as I once knew a midwife do, 
who, when a woman she was to deliver had hard labour, 
rather than a man-midwife should be sent for, undertook to 
deliver the woman herself (though told it was a man’s business), 
and in her attempting it, brought away the child, but 
left the head in the mother’s womb; and had not a man midwife 
been presently sent for, the mother had lost her life as 
well as the child; such persons may rather be termed butchers 
than midwives. But supposing the woman’s labour to be 
natural, I will next show what the midwife ought to do, in 
order of her delivery. 

139 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER V 

Of Natural Labour; What it is and what the 
Midwife is to do in such Labour 


SECTION I.—What Natural Labour is. 

THERE ARE FOUR THINGS which denominate a woman’s natural 
labour; the first is, that it be at the full time, for if a woman 
comes before her time, it cannot be termed natural labour, 
neither will it be so easy as though she had completed her 
nine months. The second thing is, that it be speedy, and 
without any ill accident; for when the time of her birth come, 
nature is not dilatory in the bringing it forth, without some 
ill accident intervene, which renders it unnatural. 

The third is, that the child be alive; for all will grant, that 
the being delivered of a dead child is very unnatural. The 
fourth is, that the child come right, for if the position of the 
child in the womb be contrary to that which is natural, the 
event will prove it so, by making that which should be a 
time of life, the death both of the mother and the child. 

Having thus told you what I mean by natural labour, I 
shall next show how the midwife is to proceed therein, in 
order to the woman’s delivery. When all the foregoing requisites 
concur, and after the waters be broken of themselves, 
let there rather a quilt be laid upon the pallet bedstead than 
a feather bed, having there-on linen and cloths in many folds, 
with such other things as are necessary, and that may be 
changed according to the exigency requiring it, so that the 
woman may not be incommoded with the blood, waters and 
other filth which are voided in labour. The bed ought to be 
ordered, that the woman being ready to be delivered, should 
lie on her back upon it, having her body in a convenient 
posture; this is, her head and breast a little raised, so that she 
may be between lying and sitting, for being so placed, she is 
best capable of breathing, and, likewise, will have more 
strength to bear her pains than if she lay otherwise, or sunk 
down in her bed. Being so placed, she must spread her thighs 
abroad, folding her legs a little towards her buttocks, somewhat 
raised by a little pillow underneath, to the end that her 
rumps should have more liberty to retire back; and let her 
feet be stayed against some firm thing; besides this, let her 

140 



The Works of Aristotle 

take firm hold of some of the good women attending her, 
with her hands, that she may the better stay herself during 
her pains. She being thus placed at her bed, having her midwife 
at hand, the better to assist as nature may require, let 
her take courage, and help her pains as best she can, bearing 
them down when they take her, which she must do by holding 
her breath, and forcing them as much as possible, in like 
manner as when she goes to stool, for by such straining, the 
diaphragm, or midriff, being strongly thrust downward, necessarily 
forces down the womb and the child in it. In the 
meantime, let the midwife endeavour to comfort her all she 
can, exhorting her to bear her labour courageously, telling 
her it will be quickly over, and that there is no fear but that 
she will have a speedy delivery. Let the midwife also, having 
no rings on her fingers, anoint them with oil of fresh butter, 
and therewith dilate gently the inward orifice of the womb 
putting her finger ends into the entry thereof, and then stretch 
them one from the other, when her pains take her; by this 
means endeavouring to help forward the child, and thrusting 
by little and little, the sides of the orifice towards the 
hinder part of the child’s head, anointing it with fresh butter 

if it be necessary. 

When the head of the infant is a little advanced into the 
inward orifice, the midwife’s phrase is:—”It is crowned”; 
because it girds and surrounds it just as a crown; but when it 
is so far that the extremities begin to appear without the 
privy parts, then they say, “The infant is in the passage”; and 
at this time the woman feels herself as if it were scratched, or 
pricked with pins, and is ready to imagine that the midwife 
hurts her, when it is occasioned by the violent distension of 
those parts and the laceration which sometimes the bigness 
of the child’s head causeth there. When things are in this 
posture, let the midwife seat herself conveniently to receive 
the child, which will come quickly, and with her finger ends 
(which she must be sure to keep close pared) let her endeavour 
to thrust the crowning of the womb (of which I have 
spoken before), back over the head of the child, and as soon 
as it is advanced as far as the ears, or thereabouts, let her take 
hold of the two sides with her two hands, that when a good 
pain comes she may quickly draw forth the child, taking 
care that the navel-string be not entangled about the neck or 
any part, as sometimes it is, lest thereby the after-burden be 

141 



The Works of Aristotle 

pulled with violence, and perhaps the womb also, to which 
it is fastened, and so either cause her to flood or else break 
the strings, both which are of bad consequence to the woman, 
whose delivery may thereby be rendered the more difficult. 
It must also be carefully observed that the head be not drawn 
forth straight, but shaking it a little from one side to the 
other, that the shoulders may sooner and easier take their 
places immediately after it is past, without losing time, lest 
the head being past, the child be stopped there by the largeness 
of the shoulders, and so come in danger of being suffocated 
and strangled in the passage, as it sometimes happens, 
for the want of care therein. But as soon as the head is born, 
if there be need, she may slide her fingers under the armpits, 
and the rest of the body will follow without any difficulty. 

As soon as the midwife hath in this manner drawn forth 
the child, let her put it on one side, lest the blood and water 
which follows immediately, should do it any injury by running 
into its mouth and nose, as they would do, if it lay on 
its back; and so endanger the choking of it. The child being 
thus born, the next thing requisite is, to bring away the after-
burden, but before that let the midwife be very careful to 

examine whether there be more children in the womb; for 
sometimes a woman may have twins that expected it not; 
which the midwife may easily know by the continuance of 
the pains after the child is born, and the bigness of the 
mother’s belly. But the midwife may be sure of it, if she puts 
her hand up to the entry of the womb, and finds there another 
watery gathering, and the child in it presenting to the 
passage, and if she find it so, she must have a care of going to 
fetch the after-birth, till the woman be delivered of all the 
children she is pregnant with. Wherefore the first string must 
be cut, being first tied with a thread three or four times 
double, and fasten the other end with string to the woman’s 
thighs, to prevent the inconvenience it may cause by hanging 
between the thighs; and then removing the child already 
born, she must take care to deliver her of the rest, observing 
all the circumstances as with the first; after which, it will be 
necessary to fetch away the after-birth, or births. But of that 
I shall treat in another section, and first show what is to be 
done to the new-born infant. 

142 



The Works of Aristotle 

SECT. II.—Of the Cutting of the Child’s Navel String. 

Though this is accounted by many but as a trifle, yet great 
care is to be taken about it, and it shows none of the least art 
and skill of a midwife to do it as it should be; and that it may 
be so done, the midwife should observe: (1) The time. (2) 
The place. (3) The manner. (4) The event. 

(1) The time is, as soon as ever the infant comes out of the 
womb, whether it brings part of the after-burden with it or 
not; for sometimes the child brings into the world a piece of 
the amnios upon its head, and is what mid wives call the 
_caul_, and ignorantly attribute some extraordinary virtue 
to the child so born; but this opinion is only the effect of 
their ignorance; for when a child is born with such a crown 
(as some call it) upon its brows, it generally betokens weakness 
and denotes a short life. But to proceed to the matter in 
hand. As soon as the child comes into the world, it should 
be considered whether it is weak or strong; and if it be weak, 
let the midwife gently put back part of the natural and vital 
blood into the body of the child by its navel; for that recruits 
a weak child (the vital and natural spirits being communicated 
by the mother to the child by its navel-string), but if 
the child be strong, the operation is needless. Only let me 
advise you, that many children that are born seemingly dead, 
may soon be brought to life again, if you squeeze six or seven 
drops of blood out of that part of the navel-string which is 
cut off, and give it to the child inwardly. 

(2) As to the place in which it should be cut, that is, whether 
it should be cut long or short, it is that which authors can 
scarcely agree in, and which many midwives quarrel about; 
some prescribing it to be cut at four fingers’ breadth, which 
is, at best, but an uncertain rule, unless all fingers were of 
one size. It is a received opinion, that the parts adapted to 
the generation are contracted and dilated according to the 
cutting of the navel-string, and this is the reason why midwives 
are generally so kind to their own sex, that they leave a 
longer part of the navel-string of a male than female, because 
they would have the males well provided for the encounters 
of Venus; and the reason they give, why they cut 
that of the female shorter is, because they believe it makes 
143 



The Works of Aristotle 

them more acceptable to their husbands. Mizaldus was not 
altogether of the opinion of these midwives, and he, therefore, 
ordered the navel string to be cut long both in male 
and female children; for which he gives the following reason, 
that the instrument of generation follows the proportion 
of it; and therefore, if it be cut too short in a female, it 
will be a hindrance to her having children. I will not go about 
to contradict the opinions of Mizaldus; these, experience has 
made good:—That one is, that if the navel-string of a child, 
after it be cut, be suffered to touch the ground, the child will 
never hold its water, either sleeping or waking, but will be 
subjected to an involuntary making of water all its lifetime. 
The other is, that a piece of a child’s navel-string carried 
about one, so that it touch his skin, defends him that wears 
it from the falling sickness and convulsions. 

(3) As to the manner it must be cut, let the midwife take a 
brown thread, four or five times double, of an ell long, or 
thereabouts, tied with a single knot at each of the ends, to 
prevent their entangling; and with this thread so accommodated 
(which the woman must have in readiness before the 
woman’s labour, as also a good pair of scissors, that no time 
may be lost) let her tie the string within an inch of the belly 
with a double knot, and turning about the end of the thread, 
let her tie two more on the other side of the string, reiterating 
it again, if it be necessary; then let her cut off the navel-
string another inch below the ligatures, towards the afterbirth, 
so that there only remains but two inches of the string, 
in the midst of which will be the knot we speak of, which 
must be so close knit, as not to suffer a drop of blood to 
squeeze out of the vessels, but care must be taken, not to 
knit it so strait, as to out it in two, and therefore the thread 
must be pretty thick and pretty strait cut, it being better too 
strait than too loose; for some children have miserably lost 
their lives, with all their blood, before it was discovered, because 
the navel-string was not well tied, therefore great care 
must be taken that no blood squeeze through; for if there 
do, a new knot must be made with the rest of the string. You 
need not fear to bind the navel-string very hard because it is 
void of sense, and that part which you leave, falls off in a 
very few days, sometimes in six or seven, or sooner, but never 
tarries longer than eight or nine. When you have thus cut 

144 



The Works of Aristotle 

the navel-string, then take care the piece that falls off touch 
not the ground, for the reason I told you Mizaldus gave, 
which experience has justified. 

(4) The last thing I mentioned, was the event or consequence, 
or what follows cutting the navel-string. As soon as it is cut, 
apply a little cotton or lint to the place to keep it warm, lest the 
cold enter into the body of the child, which it most certainly 
will do, if you have not bound it hard enough. If the lint or 
cotton you apply to it, be dipped in oil of roses, it will be the 
better, and then put another small rag three or four times double 
upon the belly; upon the top of all, put another small bolster, 
and then swathe it with a linen swathe, four fingers broad, to 
keep it steady, lest by moving too much, or from being continually 
stirred from side to side, it comes to fall off before the navel-
string, which you left remaining, is fallen off. 
It is the usual custom of midwives to put a piece of burnt 
rag to it, which we commonly call tinder; but I would rather 
advise them to put a little ammoniac to it, because of its 
drying qualities. 

SECT. III.—How to bring away the After-burden. 

A woman cannot be said to be fairly delivered, though the 
child be born, till the after-burden be also taken from her; 
herein differing from most animals, who, when they have 
brought forth their young, cast forth nothing else but some 
water, and the membranes which contained them. But 
women have an after-labour, which sometimes proves more 
dangerous than the first; and how to bring it safely away 
without prejudice to her, shall be my business to show in 
this section. 

As soon as the child is born, before the midwife either ties 
or cuts the navel-string, lest the womb should close, let her 
take the string and wind it once or twice about one or two 
fingers on her left hand joined together, the better to hold it, 
with which she may draw it moderately, and with the right 
hand, she may only take a single hold of it, above the left, 
near the privities, drawing likewise with that very gently, resting 
the while the forefinger of the same hand, extended and 
stretched forth along the string towards the entrance of the 
vagina, always observing, for the greater facility, to draw it 

145 



The Works of Aristotle 

from the side where the burden cleaves least; for in so doing, 
the rest will separate the better; and special care must be 
taken that it be not drawn forth with too much violence, lest 
by breaking the string near the burden, the midwife be obliged 
to put the whole hand into the womb to deliver the woman; 
and she need to be a very skilful person that undertakes it, 
lest the womb, to which the burden is sometimes very strongly 
fastened, be drawn away with it, as has sometimes happened. 
It is, therefore, best to use such remedies as may assist nature. 
And here take notice, that what brings away the birth, 
will also bring away the after-birth. And therefore, for effecting 
this work, I will lay down the following rules. 

(1) Use the same means of bringing away the after-birth, 
that you made use of to bring away the birth; for the same 
care and circumspection are needful now that there were then. 
(2) Considering that the labouring woman cannot but be 
much spent by what she has already undergone in bringing 
forth the infant, be therefore sure to give her something to 
comfort her. And in this case good jelly broths, also a little 
wine and toast in it, and other comforting things, will be 
necessary. 

(3) A little hellebore in powder, to make her sneeze, is in this 
case very proper. 
(4) Tansey, and the stone aetites, applied as before directed, 
are also of good use in this case. 
(5) If you take the herb vervain, and either boil it in wine, or 
a syrup with the juice of it, which you may do by adding to 
it double its weight of sugar (having clarified the juice before 
you boil it), a spoonful of that given to the woman is very 
efficacious to bring away the secundine; and feverfew and 
mugwort have the same operation taken as the former. 
(6) Alexanders10 boiled in wine, and the wine drank, also 
sweet servile, sweet cicily, angelica roots, and musterwort, 
are excellent remedies in this case. 
10 Horse-parsley. 

146 



The Works of Aristotle 

(7) Or, if this fail, the smoke of marigolds, received up a 
woman’s privities by a funnel, have been known to bring 
away the after-birth, even when the midwife let go her hold. 
(8) Boil mugwort in water till it be very soft, then take it 
out, and apply it in the manner of a poultice to the navel of 
the labouring woman, and it instantly brings away the birth. 
But special care must be taken to remove it as soon as they 
come away, lest by its long tarrying it should draw away the 
womb also. 
SECT. IV.—Of Laborious and Difficult Labours and how 
the Midwife is to proceed therein. 

There are three sorts of bad labours, all painful and difficult, 
but not all properly unnatural. It will be necessary, therefore, 
to distinguish these. 

The first of these labours is that when the mother and child 
suffer very much extreme pain and difficulty, even though 
the child come right; and this is distinguishably called the 

laborious labour. 

The second is that which is difficult and differs not much 
from the former, except that, besides those extraordinary 
pains, it is generally attended with some unhappy accident, 
which, by retarding the birth, causes the difficulty; but these 
difficulties being removed, it accelerates the birth, and hastens 
the delivery. 

Some have asked, what is the reason that women bring 
forth their children with so much pain? I answer, the sense 
of feeling is distributed to the whole body by the nerves, and 
the mouth of the womb being so narrow, that it must of 
necessity be dilated at the time of the woman’s delivery, the 
dilating thereof stretches the nerves, and from thence comes 
the pain. And therefore the reason why some women have 
more pain in their labour than others, proceeds from their 
having the mouth of the matrix more full of nerves than 
others. The best way to remove those difficulties that occasion 
hard pains and labour, is to show first from whence 
they proceed. Now the difficulty of labour proceeds either 
from the mother, or child, or both. 

From the mother, by reason of the indisposition of the 

147 



The Works of Aristotle 

body, or from some particular part only, and chiefly the 
womb, as when the woman is weak, and the mother is not 
active to expel the burden, or from weakness, or disease, or 
want of spirits; or it may be from strong passion of the mind 
with which she was once possessed; she may also be too 
young, and so may have the passage too narrow; or too old, 
and then, if it be her first child, because her pains are too dry 
and hard, and cannot be easily dilated, as happens also to 
them which are too lean; likewise those who are small, short 
or deformed, as crooked women who have not breath enough 
to help their pains, and to bear them down, persons that are 
crooked having sometimes the bones of the passage not well 
shaped. The colic also hinders labour, by preventing the true 
pains; and all great and active pains, as when the woman is 
taken with a great and violent fever, a great flooding, frequent 
convulsions, bloody flux, or any other great distemper. 
Also, excrements retained cause great difficulty, and so 
does a stone in the bladder: or when the bladder is full of 
urine, without being able to void it, or when the woman is 
troubled with great and painful piles. It may also be from 
the passages, when the membranes are thick, the orifice too 

narrow, and the neck of the womb not sufficiently open, the 
passages strained and pressed by tumours in the adjacent 
parts, or when the bones are too firm, and will not open, 
which very much endangers the mother and the child; or 
when the passages are not slippery, by reason of the waters 
having broken too soon, or membranes being too thin. The 
womb may also be out of order with regard to its bad situation 
or conformation, having its neck too narrow, hard and 
callous, which may easily be so naturally, or may come by 
accident, being many times caused by a tumour, an 
imposthume, ulcer or superfluous flesh. 

As to hard labour occasioned by the child, it is when the 
child happens to stick to a mole, or when it is so weak it 
cannot break the membranes; or if it be too big all over, or in 
the head only; or if the natural vessels are twisted about its 
neck; when the belly is hydropsical; or when it is monstrous, 
having two heads, or joined to another child, also, when the 
child is dead or so weak that it can contribute nothing to its 
birth; likewise when it comes wrong, or there are two or 
more. And to all these various difficulties there is oftentimes 
one more, and that is, the ignorance of the midwife, who for 

148 



The Works of Aristotle 

want of understanding in her business, hinders nature in her 
work instead of helping her. 

Having thus looked into the cause of hard labour, I will 
now show the industrious midwife how she may minister 
some relief to the labouring woman under these difficult circumstances. 
But it will require judgment and understanding 
in the midwife, when she finds a woman in difficult labour, 
to know the particular obstruction, or cause thereof, that so 
a suitable remedy may be applied; as for instance, when it 
happens by the mother’s being too young and too narrow, 
she must be gently treated, and the passages anointed with 
oil, hog’s lard, or fresh butter, to relax and dilate them the 
easier, lest there should happen a rupture of any part when 
the child is born; for sometimes the peritoneum breaks, with 
the skin from the privities to the fundament. 

But if the woman be in years with her first child, let her 
lower parts be anointed to mollify the inward orifice, which 
in such a case being more hard and callous, does not easily 
yield to the distention of labour, which is the true cause why 
such women are longer in labour, and also why their children, 
being forced against the inward orifice of the womb 

(which, as I have said, is a little callous) are born with great 
bumps and bruises on their heads. 

Those women who are very small and mis-shaped, should 
not be put to bed, at least until the waters are broken, but 
rather kept upright and assisted to walk about the chamber, 
by being supported under the arms; for by that means, they 
will breathe more freely, and mend their pains better than 
on the bed, because there they lie all of a heap. As for those 
that are very lean, and have hard labour from that cause, let 
them moisten the parts with oil and ointments, to make them 
more smooth and slippery, that the head of the infant, and 
the womb be not so compressed and bruised by the hardness 
of the mother’s bones which form the passage. If the cause 
be weakness, she ought to be strengthened, the better to support 
her pains, to which end give her good jelly broths, and 
a little wine with a toast in it. If she fears her pains, let her be 
comforted, assuring her that she will not endure any more, 
but be delivered in a little time. But if her pains be slow and 
small, or none at all, they must be provoked by frequent and 
pretty strong clysters; let her walk about her chamber, so 
that the weight of the child may help them forward. If she 

149 



The Works of Aristotle 

flood or have strong convulsions she must then be helped by 
a speedy delivery; the operation I shall relate in this section 
of unnatural labours. If she be costive, let her use clysters, 
which may also help to dispel colic, at those times very injurious 
because attended with useless pains, and because such 
bear not downward, and so help not to forward the birth. If 
she find an obstruction or stoppage of the urine, by reason 
of the womb’s bearing too much on the bladder, let her lift 
up her belly a little with her hands, and try if by that she 
receives any benefit; if she finds she does not, it will be necessary 
to introduce a catheter into her bladder, and thereby 
draw forth her urine. If the difficulty be from the ill posture 
of the woman, let her be placed otherwise, in a posture more 
suitable and convenient for her; also if it proceeds from indispositions 
of the womb, as from its oblique situation, etc., 
it must be remedied, as well as it can be, by the placing her 
body accordingly; or, if it be a vicious conformation, having 
the neck too hard, too callous, too straight, it must be 
anointed with oil and ointments, as before directed. If the 
membranes be so strong that the waters do not break in due 
time, they may be broken with the fingers, if the midwife be 

first well assured that the child is come forward into the passage, 
and ready to follow presently after; or else, by the breaking 
of the waters too soon, the child may be in danger of 
remaining dry a long time; to supply which defect, you may 
moisten the parts with fomentations, decoctions, and emollient 
oils; which yet is not half so well as when nature does 
her work in her own time, with the ordinary slime and waters. 
The membranes sometimes do press forth with the waters, 
three or four fingers’ breadth out of the body before the 
child resembling a bladder full of water; but there is no great 
danger in breaking them, if they be not already broken; for 
when the case is so, the child is always in readiness to follow, 
being in the passage, but let the midwife be very careful not 
to pull it with her hand, lest the after-burden be thereby 
loosened before its time, for it adheres thereto very strongly. 
If the navel-string happen to come first, it must presently be 
put up again, and kept so, if possible, or otherwise, the woman 
must be immediately delivered. But if the after-burden should 
come first, it must not be put up again by any means; for the 
infant having no further occasion for it, it would be but an 
obstacle if it were put up; in this case, it must be cut off, 

150 



The Works of Aristotle 

having tied the navel-string, and afterwards draw forth the 
child with all speed that may be, lest it be suffocated. 

SECT. V.—Of Women labouring of a dead Child. 

When the difficulty of labour arises from a dead child, it is a 
great danger to a mother and great care ought to be taken 
therein; but before anything be done, the midwife ought to 
be well assured that the child is dead indeed, which may be 
known by these signs. 

(1) The breast suddenly slacks, or falls flat, or bags down. 
(2) A great coldness possesses the belly of the mother, especially 
about the navel. (3) Her urine is thick, with a filthy 
stinking settling at the bottom. (4) No motion of the child 
can be perceived; for the trial whereof, let the midwife put 
her hand into warm water, and lay it upon the belly, for that, 
if it is alive, will make it stir. (5) She is very subject to dreams 
of dead men, and affrighted therewith. (6) She has extraordinary 
longings to eat such things as are contrary to nature. 
(7) Her breath stinks, though not used so to do. (8) When 
she turns herself in her bed, the child sways that way like a 
lump of lead. 

These things being carefully observed, the midwife may 
make a judgment whether the child be alive or dead, especially 
if the woman take the following prescription:—”Take 
half a pint of white wine and burn it, and add thereto half an 
ounce of cinnamon, but no other spices whatever, and when 
she has drunk it, if her travailing pains come upon her, the 
child is certainly dead; but if not, the child may possibly be 
either weak or sick, but not dead. This will bring her pains 
upon her if it be dead, and will refresh the child and give her 
ease if it be living; for cinnamon refresheth and strengtheneth 
the child. 

Now, if upon trial it be found the child is dead, let the 
mother do all she can to forward the delivery, because a dead 
child can in no wise be helpful therein. It will be necessary, 
therefore, that she take some comfortable things to prevent 
her fainting, by reason of the putrid vapours arising from 
the dead child. And in order to her delivery let her take the 
following herbs boiled in white wine (or at least as many of 
them as you can get), viz., dittany, betony, pennyroyal, sage, 

151 



The Works of Aristotle 

feverfew, centaury, ivy leaves and berries. Let her also take 
sweet basil in powder, and half a drachm at a time in white 
wine; let her privities also be anointed with the juice of the 
garden tansey. Or take the tansey in the summer when it can 
most plentifully be had, and before it runs up to flower, and 
having bruised it well, boil it in oil until the juice of it be 
consumed. If you set it in the sun, after you have mixed it 
with oil, it will be more effectual. This, an industrious midwife, 
who would be prepared against all events, ought to 
have always by her. As to the manner of her delivery, the 
same methods must be used as are mentioned in the section 
of natural labour. And here again, I cannot but commend 
the stone aetites, held near the privities, whose magnetic virtue 
renders it exceedingly necessary on this occasion, for it 
draws the child any way with the same facility that the loadstone 
draws iron. 

Let the midwife also make a strong decoction of hyssop 
with water, and let the woman drink it very hot, and it will 
in a little time bring away the dead child. 

If, as soon as she is delivered of the dead child, you are in 
doubt that part of the afterbirth is left behind in the body 

(for in such cases as these many times it rots, and comes 
away piece-meal), let her continue drinking the same decoction 
until her body be cleansed. 

A decoction made of herbs, muster-wort, used as you did 
the decoction of hyssop, works the effect. Let the midwife 
also take the roots of pollodum and stamp them well; warm 
them a little and bind them on the sides of her feet, and it 
will soon bring away the child either dead or alive. 

The following medicines also are such as stir up the expulsive 
faculty, but in this case they must be stronger, because 
the motion of the child ceases. 

Take savine, round birthwort, trochisks of myrrh, castor, 
cinnamon and saffron, each half a drachm; make a powder, 
give a drachm. 

Or she may purge first, and then apply an emollient, anointing 
her about the womb with oil of lilies, sweet almonds, 
camomiles, hen and goose-grease. Also foment to get out 
the child, with a decoction of mercury, orris, wild cucumbers, 
saecus, broom flowers. Then anoint the privities and 
loins with ointment of sow-bread. Or, take coloquintida, 
agaric, birthwort, of each a drachm; make a powder, add 

152 



The Works of Aristotle 

ammoniacum dissolved in wine, ox-gall, each two drachms. 
Or make a fume with an ass’s hoof burnt, or gallianum, or 
castor, and let it be taken in with a funnel. 

To take away pains and strengthen the parts, foment with 
the decoction of mugwort, mallows, rosemary, with wood 
myrtle, St. John’s wort, each half an ounce, spermaceti two 
drachms, deer’s suet, an ounce; with wax make an ointment. 
Or take wax six ounces, spermaceti an ounce; melt them, 
dip flux therein, and lay it all over her belly. 

If none of these things will do, the last remedy is to try 
surgery, and then the midwife ought without delay to send 
for an expert and able man-midwife, to deliver her by manual 
operation, of which I shall treat more at large in the next 
chapter. 

CHAPTER VI 

Of Unnatural Labour 

IN SHOWING THE DUTY of a midwife, when the child-bearing 
woman’s labour is unnatural, it will be requisite to show, in 
the first place, what I mean by unnatural labour, for that 
women do bring forth in pain and sorrow is natural and 
common to all. Therefore, that which I call unnatural is, 
when the child comes to the birth in a contrary posture to 
that which nature ordained, and in which the generality of 
the children come into the world. 

The right and natural birth is when the child comes with 
its head first; and yet this is too short a definition of a natural 
birth; for if any part of the head but the crown comes 
first, so that the body follows not in a straight line, it is a 
wrong and difficult birth, even though the head comes first. 
Therefore, if the child comes with its feet first, or with the 
side across, it is quite contrary to nature, or to speak more 
plainly, that which I call unnatural. 

Now, there are four general ways a child may come wrong. 

153 



The Works of Aristotle 

(1) When any of the foreparts of the body first present themselves. 
(2) When by an unhappy transposition, any of the 
hinder parts of the body first present themselves. (3) When 
either of the sides, or, (4) the feet present themselves first. To 
these, the different wrong postures that a child can present 
itself in, may be reduced. 
SECTION I.—How to deliver a Woman of a Dead Child 
by Manual Operation. 

When manual operation is necessary, let the operator acquaint 
the woman of the absolute necessity there is for such 
an operation; and that, as the child has already lost its life, 
there is no other way left for the saving hers. Let him also 
inform her, for her encouragement, that he doubts not, with 
the divine blessing, to deliver her safely, and that the pains 
arising therefrom will not be so great as she fears. Then let 
him stir up the woman’s pains by giving her some sharp clyster, 
to excite her throes to bear down, and bring forth the 
child. And if this prevails not, let him proceed with the 

manual operation. 

First, therefore, let her be placed across the bed that he 
may operate the easier; and let her lie on her back, with her 
hips a little higher than her head, or at least the body equally 
placed, when it is necessary to put back or turn the infant to 
give it a better posture. Being thus situated, she must fold 
her legs so as her heels be towards her buttocks, and her 
thighs spread, and so held by a couple of strong persons, 
there must be others also to support her under her arms, that 
the body may not slide down when the child is drawn forth; 
for which sometimes great strength is required. Let the sheets 
and blankets cover her thighs for decency’s sake, and with 
respect to the assistants, and also to prevent her catching 
cold; the operator herein governing himself as well with respect 
to his convenience, and the facility and surety of the 
operation, as to other things. Then let him anoint the entrance 
to the womb with oil or fresh butter, if necessary, that 
with so more ease he may introduce his hand, which must 
also be anointed, and having by the signs above mentioned, 
received satisfaction that the child is dead, he must do his 
endeavours to fetch it away as soon as he possibly can. If the 

154 



The Works of Aristotle 

child offer the head first, he must gently put it back until he 
hath liberty to introduce his hand quite into the womb; then 
sliding it along, under the belly, to find the feet, let him 
draw it forth by them, being very careful to keep the head 
from being locked into the passage; and that it be not separated 
from the body; which may be effected the more easily, 
because the child being very rotten and putrefied, the operator 
need not be so mindful to keep the breast and face downwards 
as he is in living births. But if notwithstanding all 
these precautions, by reason of the child’s putrefaction, the 
head should be separated and left behind in the womb, it 
must be drawn forth according to the directions which have 
been given in the third section of this chapter. But when the 
head, coming first, is so far advanced that it cannot well be 
put back, it is better to draw it forth so, than to torment the 
woman too much by putting it back to turn it, and bring it 
by the feet; but the head being a part round and slippery, it 
may also happen that the operator cannot take hold of it 
with his fingers by reason of its moisture, nor put them up 
to the side of it, because the passage is filled with its bigness; 
he must, therefore, take a proper instrument, and put it up 

as far as he can without violence, between the womb and the 
child’s head (for the child being dead before, there can be no 
danger in the operation), and let him fasten it there, giving 
it hold upon one of the bones of the skull, that it may not 
slide, and after it is well fixed in the head, he may therewith 
draw it forth, keeping the ends of the fingers of his left hand 
flat upon the opposite side, the better to help to disengage it, 
and by wagging it a little, to conduct it directly out of the 
passage, until the head be quite born; and then, taking hold 
of it with his hands only, the shoulders being drawn into the 
passage, and so sliding the fingers of both hands under the 
armpits, the child may be quite delivered, and then the after-
burden fetched, to finish the operation, being careful not 
to pluck the navel-string too hard lest it break, as often happens 
when it is corrupt. 

If the dead child comes with the arm up to the shoulders 
so extremely swelled that the woman must suffer too great 
violence to have it put back, it is then (being first well assured 
the child is dead) best to take it off by the shoulder 
joints, by twisting three or four times about, which is very 
easily done by reason of the softness and tenderness of the 

155 



The Works of Aristotle 

body. After the arm is so separated, and no longer possesses 
the passage, the operator will have more room to put up his 
hand into the womb, to fetch the child by the feet and bring 
it away. 

But although the operator is sure the child is dead in the 
womb, yet he must not therefore presently use instruments 
because they are never to be used but when hands are not 
sufficient, and there is no other remedy to prevent the 
woman’s danger, or to bring forth the child any other way; 
and the judicious operator will choose that way which is the 
least hazardous, and most safe. 

SECT. II.—How a Woman must be Delivered when the 
Child’s Feet come first. 

There is nothing more obvious to those whose business it is 
to assist labouring women, than that the several unnatural 
postures in which children present themselves at the birth 
are the occasions of most of the bad labours and ill accidents 
that happen to them in that condition. 

And since midwives are often obliged, because of their unnatural 
situations, to draw the children forth by the feet, I 
conceive it to be most proper first to show how a child must 
be brought forth that presents itself in that posture, because 
it will be a guide to several of the rest. 

I know indeed in this case it is the advice of several authors 
to change the figure, and place the head so that it may present 
to the birth, and this counsel I should be very much inclined 
to follow, could they but also show how it may be done. But 
it will appear very difficult, if not impossible to be performed, 
if we would avoid the danger that by such violent agitations 
both the mother and the child must be put into, and therefore 
my opinion is, that it is better to draw forth by the feet, 
when it presents itself in that posture, than to venture a worse 
accident by turning it. 

As soon, therefore, as the waters are broken, and it is known 
that the child come thus and that the womb is open enough 
to admit the midwife’s or operator’s hand into it, or else by 
anointing the passage with oil or hog’s grease, to endeavour 
to dilate it by degrees, using her fingers to this purpose, 
spreading them one from the other, after they are together 

156 



The Works of Aristotle 

entered, and continue to do so until they be sufficiently dilated, 
then taking care that her nails be well pared, no rings 
on her fingers and her hands well anointed with oil or fresh 
butter, and the woman placed in the manner directed in the 
former section, let her gently introduce her hand into the 
entrance of the womb, where finding the child’s feet, let her 
draw it forth in the manner I shall presently direct; only let 
her first see whether it presents one foot or both, and if but 
one foot, she ought to consider whether it be the right foot 
or the left, and also in what fashion it comes; for by that 
means she will soon come to know where to find the other, 
which as soon as she knows and finds, let her draw it forth 
with the other; but of this she must be specially careful, viz., 
that the second be not the foot of another child; for if so, it 
may be of the utmost consequence, for she may sooner split 
both mother and child, than draw them forth. But this may 
be easily prevented if she but slide the hand up by the first 
leg and thigh to the waist, and there finding both thighs 
joined together, and descending from one and the same body. 
And this is also the best means to find the other foot, when 
it comes but with one. 

As soon as the midwife has found both the child’s feet, she 
may draw them forth, and holding them together, may bring 
them little by little in this manner, taking afterwards hold of 
the arms and thighs, as soon as she can come at them, drawing 
them so till the hips come forth. While this is doing, let 
her observe to wrap the parts in a single cloth, so that her 
hands being always greasy slide not in the infant’s body, which 
is very slippery, because of the vicious humours which are all 
over it; which being done, she may take hold under the hips, 
so as to draw it forth to the beginning of the breast; and let 
her on both sides with her hand bring down the child’s hand 
along its body, which she may easily find; and then let her 
take care that the belly and face of the child be downwards; 
for if they should be upwards, there would be the same danger 
of its being stopped by the chin, over the share-bone, 
and therefore, if it be not so she must turn it to that posture; 
which may easily be done if she takes a proper hold of the 
body when the breasts and arms are forth, in the manner we 
have said, and draw it, turning it in proportion on that side 
it most inclines to, till it be turned with the face downwards, 
and so, having brought it to the shoulders, let her lose no 

157 



The Works of Aristotle 

time, desiring the woman at the same time to bear down, 
that so drawing the head at that instant may take its place, 
and not be stopped in the passage, though the midwife takes 
all possible care to prevent it. And when this happens, she 
must endeavour to draw forth the child by the shoulders 
(taking care that she separate not the body from the head, as 
I have known it done by the midwife), discharging it by little 
and little from the bones in the passage with the fingers of 
each hand, sliding them on each side opposite the other, 
sometimes above and sometimes under, till the work be 
ended; endeavouring to dispatch it as soon as possible, lest 
the child be suffocated, as it will unavoidably be, if it remain 
long in that posture; and this being well and carefully effected, 
she may soon after fetch away the after-birth, as I 
have before directed. 

SECT. III.—How to bring away the Head of the Child, when 
separated from the Body, and left behind in the Womb. 

Though the utmost care be taken in bringing away the child 

by the feet, yet if it happen to be dead, it is sometimes so 
putrid and corrupt, that with the least pull the head separates 
from the body and remains alone in the womb, and 
cannot be brought away but with a manual operation and 
great difficulty, it being extremely slippery, by reason of the 
place where it is, and from the roundness of its figure, on 
which no hold can well be taken; and so very great is the 
difficulty in this case that sometimes two or three very able 
practitioners in midwifery have, one after the other, left the 
operation unfinished, as not able to effect it, after the utmost 
industry, skill and strength; so that the woman, not 
being able to be delivered, perished. To prevent which fatal 
accident, let the following operation be observed. 

When the infant’s head separates from the body, and is left 
alone behind, whether owing to putrefaction or otherwise, 
let the operator immediately, without any delay, while the 
womb is yet open, direct up his right hand to the mouth of 
the head (for no other hole can there be had), and having 
found it let him put one or two of his fingers into it, and the 
thumb under its chin; then let him draw it little by little, 
holding it by the jaws; but if that fails, as sometimes it will 

158 



The Works of Aristotle 

when putrefied, then let him pull off the right hand and 
slide up his left, with which he must support the head, and 
with the right hand let him take a narrow instrument called 
a crochet, but let it be strong and with a single branch, which 
he must guide along the inside of his hand, with the point of 
it towards it, for fear of hurting the womb; and having thus 
introduced it, let him turn it towards the head to strike either 
in an eyehole, or the hole of the ear, or behind the head, 
or else between the sutures, as he finds it most convenient 
and easy; and then draw forth the head so fastened with the 
said instrument, still helping to conduct it with his left hand; 
but when he hath brought it near the passage, being strongly 
fastened to the instrument, let him remember to draw forth 
his hand, that the passage not being filled with it, may be 
larger and easier, keeping still a finger or two on the side of 
the head, the better to disengage it. 

There is also another method, with more ease and less hardship 
than the former; let the operator take a soft fillet or 
linen slip, of about four fingers’ breadth, and the length of 
three quarters of an ell or thereabouts, taking the two ends 
with the left hand, and the middle with the right, and let 

him so put it up with his right, as that it may be beyond the 
head, to embrace it as a sling does a stone, and afterwards 
draw forth the fillet by the two ends together; it will thus be 
easily drawn forth, the fillet not hindering the least passage, 
because it takes up little or no space. 

When the head is fetched out of the womb care must be 
taken that not the least part of it be left behind, and likewise 
to cleanse the womb of the after-burden, if yet remaining. If 
the burden be wholly separated from the side of the womb, 
that ought to be first brought away, because it may also hinder 
the taking hold of the head. But if it still adheres to the womb, 
it must not be meddled with till the head be brought away; 
for if one should endeavour to separate it from the womb, it 
might then cause a flooding, which would be augmented by 
the violence of the operation, the vessels to which it is joined 
remaining for the most part open as long as the womb is 
distended, which the head causeth while it is retained in it, 
and cannot be closed until this strange body be voided, and 
this it doth by contracting and compressing itself together, 
as has been more fully before explained. Besides, the afterbirth 
remaining thus cleaving to the womb during the op


159 



The Works of Aristotle 

eration, prevents it from receiving easily either bruise or hurt. 

SECT. IV.—How to deliver a Woman when the child’s head 
is presented to the birth. 

Though some may think it a natural labour when the child’s 
head come first, yet, if the child’s head present not the right 
way, even that is an unnatural labour; and therefore, though 
the head comes first, yet if it be the side of the head instead 
of the crown, it is very dangerous both to the mother and 
the child, for the child’s neck would be broken, if born in 
that manner, and by how much the mother’s pains continue 
to bear the child, which is impossible unless the head be 
rightly placed, the more the passages are stopped. Therefore, 
as soon as the position of the child is known, the woman 
must be laid with all speed, lest the child should advance 
further than this vicious posture, and thereby render it more 
difficult to thrust it back, which must be done, in order to 
place the head right in the passage, as it ought to be. 

To this purpose, therefore, place the woman so that her but


tocks may be a little higher than her head and shoulders, causing 
her to lean a little to the opposite side to the child’s ill 
posture; then let the operator slide up his hand, well anointed 
with oil, by the side of the child’s head; to bring it right gently, 
with his fingers between the head and the womb; but if the 
head be so engaged that it cannot be done that way, he must 
then put up his hand to the shoulders, that by so thrusting 
them back a little into the womb, sometimes on the one side, 
and sometimes on the other, he may, little by little, give a 
natural position. I confess it would be better if the operator 
could put back the child by its shoulders with both hands, but 
the head takes up so much room, that he will find much ado 
to put up one, with which he must perform this operation, 
and, with the help of the finger-ends of the other hand put 
forward the child’s birth as in natural labour. 

Some children present their face first, having their hands 
turned back, in which posture it is extremely difficult for a 
child to be born; and if it continues so long, the face will be 
swelled and become black and blue, so that it will at first 
appear monstrous, which is occasioned as well by the compression 
of it in that place, as by the midwife’s fingers in 

160 



The Works of Aristotle 

handling it, in order to place it in a better posture. But this 
blackness will wear away in three or four days’ time, by anointing 
it often with oil of sweet almonds. To deliver the birth, 
the same operation must be used as in the former, when the 
child comes first with the side of the head; only let the midwife 
or operator work very gently to avoid as much as possible 
the bruising the face. 

SECT. V.—How to Deliver a Woman when the Child presents 
one or both Hands together with the Head. 

Sometimes the infant will present some other part together 
with its head; which if it does, it is usually with one or both 
of its hands; and this hinders the birth, because the hands 
take up part of that passage which is little enough for the 
head alone; besides that, when this happens, they generally 
cause the head to lean on one side; and therefore this position 
may be well styled unnatural. When the child presents 
thus, the first thing to be done after it is perceived, must be, 
to prevent it from coming down more, or engaging further 

in the passage; and therefore, the operator having placed the 
woman on the bed, with her head lower than her buttocks, 
must guide and put back the infant’s hand with his own as 
much as may be, or both of them, if they both come down, 
to give way to the child’s head; and this being done, if the 
head be on one side, it must be brought into its natural posture 
in the middle of the passage, that it may come in a straight 
line, and then proceed as directed in the foregoing section. 

SECT. VI.—How a Woman ought to be delivered, when the 
Hands and Feet of the Infant come together. 

There are none but will readily grant, that when the hands 
and feet of an infant present together, the labour must be 
unnatural, because it is impossible a child should be born in 
that manner. In this case, therefore, when the midwife guides 
her hand towards the orifice of the womb she will perceive 
only many fingers close together, and if it be not sufficiently 
dilated, it will be a good while before the hands and feet will 
be exactly distinguished; for they are sometimes so shut and 

161 



The Works of Aristotle 

pressed together, that they seem to be all of one and the 
same shape, but where the womb is open enough to introduce 
the hand into it, she will easily know which are the 
hands and which are the feet; and having taken particular 
notice thereof, let her slide up her hand and presently direct 
it towards the infant’s breast, which she will find very near, 
and then let her gently thrust back the body towards the 
bottom of the womb, leaving the feet in the same place where 
she found them. And then, having placed the woman in a 
convenient posture, that is to say, her buttocks a little raised 
above her breast (and which situation ought also to be observed 
when the child is to be put back into the womb), let 
the midwife afterwards take hold of the child by the feet, 
and draw it forth, as is directed in the second section. 

This labour, though somewhat troublesome, yet is much 
better than when the child presents only its hands; for then 
the child must be quite turned about before it can be drawn 
forth; but in this they are ready, presenting themselves, and 
there is little to do, but to lift and thrust back the upper part 
of the body, which is almost done of itself, by drawing it by 
the feet alone. 

I confess there are many authors that have written of 
labours, who would have all wrong births reduced to a natural 
figure, which is, to turn it that it may come with the head 
first. But those that have written thus, are such as never understood 
the practical part, for if they had the least experience 
therein, they would know that it is impossible; at least, 
if it were to be done, that violence must necessarily be used 
in doing it, that would probably be the death both of mother 
and child in the operation. I would, therefore, lay down as a 
general rule, that whenever a child presents itself wrong to 
the birth, in what posture so ever, from the shoulders to the 
feet, it is the way, and soonest done, to draw it out by the 
feet; and that it is better to search for them, if they do not 
present themselves, than to try and put them in their natural 
posture, and place the head foremost; for the great endeavours 
necessary to be used in turning the child in the womb, do so 
much weaken both the mother and the child, that there remains 
not afterwards strength enough to commit the operation 
to the work of nature; for, usually, the woman has no 
more throes or pains fit for labour after she has been so 
wrought upon; for which reason it would be difficult and 

162 



The Works of Aristotle 

tedious at best; and the child, by such an operation made 
very weak, would be in extreme danger of perishing before it 
could be born. It is, therefore, much better in these cases to 
bring it away immediately by the feet, searching for them as 
I have already directed, when they do not present themselves; 
by which the mother will be prevented a tedious labour, and 
the child be often brought alive into the world, who otherwise 
could hardly escape death. 

SECT. VII.—How a Woman should be delivered that has 
twins, which present themselves in different postures. 

We have already spoken something of the birth of twins in 
the chapter of natural labour, for it is not an unnatural labour 
barely to have twins, provided they come in the right position 
to the birth. But when they present themselves in different 
postures, they come properly under the denomination 
of unnatural labours; and if when one child presents 
itself in a wrong figure, it makes the labour dangerous and 
unnatural, it must needs make it much more so when there 

are several, and render it not only more painful to the mother 
and children, but to the operator also; for they often trouble 
each other and hinder both their births. Besides which the 
womb is so filled with them, that the operator can hardly 
introduce his hand without much violence, which he must 
do, if they are to be turned or thrust back, to give them a 
better position. 

When a woman is pregnant with two children, they rarely 
present to the birth together, the one being generally more 
forward than the other; and that is the reason that but one is 
felt, and that many times the midwife knows not that there 
are twins until the first is born, and that she is going to fetch 
away the afterbirth. In the first chapter, wherein I treated of 
natural labour, I have showed how a woman should be delivered 
of twins, presenting themselves both right; and before 
I close the chapter of unnatural labour, it only remains 
that I show what ought to be done when they either both 
come wrong or one of them only, as for the most part it 
happens; the first generally coming right, and the second 
with the feet forward, or in some worse posture. In such a 
case, the birth of the first must be hastened as much as pos


163 



The Works of Aristotle 

sible and to make way for the second, which is best brought 
away by the feet, without endeavouring to place it right, because 
it has been, as well as the mother, already tired and 
weakened by the birth of the first, and there would be greater 
danger to its death, than likelihood of its coming out of the 
womb that way. 

But if, when the first is born naturally, the second should 
likewise offer its head to the birth, it would then be best to 
leave nature to finish what she has so well begun, and if nature 
should be too slow in her work, some of those things 
mentioned in the fourth chapter to accelerate the birth, may 
be properly enough applied, and if, after that, the second 
birth should be delayed, let a manual operation be delayed 
no longer, but the woman being properly placed, as has been 
before directed, let the operator direct his hand gently into 
the womb to find the feet, and so draw forth the second 
child, which will be the more easily effected, because there is 
a way made sufficiently by the birth of the first; and if the 
waters of the second child be not broke, as it often happens, 
yet, intending to bring it by its feet, he need not scruple to 
break the membranes with his fingers; for though, when the 

birth of a child is left to the operation of nature, it is necessary 
that the waters should break of themselves, yet when 
the child is brought out of the womb by art, there is no 
danger in breaking them, nay, on the contrary it becomes 
necessary; for without the waters are broken, it will be almost 
impossible to turn the child. 

But herein principally lies the care of the operator, that he 
be not deceived, when either the hands or feet of both children 
offer themselves together to the birth; in this case he 
ought well to consider the operation, of whether they be not 
joined together, or any way monstrous, and which part belongs 
to one child and which to the other; so that they may 
be fetched one after the other, and not both together, as may 
be, if it were not duly considered, taking the right foot of 
one and the left of the other, and so drawing them together, 
as if they both belonged to one body, because there is a left 
and a right, by which means it would be impossible to deliver 
them. But a skilful operator will easily prevent this, if, 
after having found two or three of several children presenting 
together in the passage, and taking aside two of the 
forwardest, a right and a left, and sliding his arm along the 

164 



The Works of Aristotle 

legs and thighs up to the wrist, if forward, or to the buttocks, 
if backwards, he finds they both belong to one body; 
of which being thus assured, he may begin to draw forth the 
nearest, without regarding which is the strongest or weakest, 
bigger or less, living or dead, having first put aside that part 
of the other child which offers to have the more way, and so 
dispatch the first as soon as may be, observing the same rules 
as if there were but one, that is keeping the breast and face 
downwards, with every circumstance directed in that section 
where the child comes with its feet first, and not fetch 
the burden till the second child is born. And therefore, when 
the operator hath drawn forth one child, he must separate it 
from the burden, having tied and cut the navel-string, and 
then fetch the other by the feet in the same manner, and 
afterwards bring away the after-burden with the two strings 
as hath been before showed. If the children present any other 
part but the feet, the operator may follow the same method 
as directed in the foregoing section, where the several unnatural 
positions are fully treated of. 

CHAPTER VII 

Directions for Child-bearing Women in their 
Lying-in 


SECTION I.—How a Woman newly Delivered ought to be 
ordered. 

AS SOON AS she is laid in her bed, let her be placed in it 
conveniently for ease and rest, which she stands in great need 
of to recover herself of the great fatigue she underwent during 
her travail, and that she may lie the more easily let her 
hands and body be a little raised, that she may breathe more 
freely, and cleanse the better, especially of that blood which 
then comes away, that so it may not clot, which being retained 
causeth great pain. 

Having thus placed her in bed, let her take a draught of 
burnt white wine, having a drachm of spermaceti melted 
therein. The best vervain is also singularly good for a woman 
in this condition, boiling it in what she either eats or drinks, 
fortifying the womb so exceedingly that it will do it more 

165 



The Works of Aristotle 

good in two days, than any other thing does in double that 
time, having no offensive taste. And this is no more than 
what she stands in need of; for her lower parts being greatly 
distended until the birth of the infant, it is good to endeavour 
the prevention of an inflammation there. Let there also 
be outwardly applied, all over the bottom of her belly and 
privities, the following anodyne and cataplasm:—Take two 
ounces of oil of sweet almonds, and two or three new laid 
eggs, yolks and whites, stirring them together in an earthen 
pipkin over hot embers till they come to the consistence of a 
poultice; which being spread upon a cloth, must be applied 
to those parts indifferently warm, having first taken away 
the closures (which were put to her presently after her delivery), 
and likewise such clots of blood as were then left. Let 
this lie on for five or six hours, and then renew it again when 
you see cause. 

Great care ought to be taken at first, that if her body be 
very weak, she be not kept too hot, for extremity of heat 
weakens nature and dissolves the strength; and whether she 
be weak or strong, be sure that no cold air comes near her at 
first; for cold is an enemy to the spermatic parts; if it get into 

the womb it increases the after pains, causes swelling in the 
womb and hurts the nerves. As to her diet, let it be hot, and 
let her eat but little at a time. Let her avoid the light for the 
first three days, and longer if she be weak, for her labour 
weakens her eyes exceedingly, by a harmony between the 
womb and them. Let her also avoid great noise, sadness and 
trouble of mind. 

If the womb be foul, which may easily be perceived by the 
impurity of the blood (which will then easily come away in 
clots or stinking, or if you suspect any of the after-burden to 
be left behind, which may sometimes happen), make her 
drink a feverfew, mugwort, pennyroyal and mother of thyme, 
boiled in white wine and sweetened with sugar. 

Panado and new laid eggs are the best meat for her at first, 
of which she may eat often, but not too much at a time. And 
let her nurse use cinnamon in all her meats and drinks, for it 
generally strengthens the womb. 

Let her stir as little as may be until after the fifth, sixth, or 
seventh day after her delivery, if she be weak; and let her talk 
as little as possible, for that weakens her very much. 

If she goes not well to stool, give a clyster made only of the 

166 



The Works of Aristotle 

decoction of mallows and a little brown sugar. 

When she hath lain in a week or more, let her use such 
things as close the womb, of which knot-grass and comfrey 
are very good, and to them you may add a little polypodium, 
for it will do her good, both leaves and root being bruised. 

SECT. II.—How to remedy those Accidents which a Lying-
in Woman is subject to. 

I. The first common and usual accident that troubles women 
in their lying-in is after-pains. They proceed from cold and 
wind contained in the bowels, with which they are easily 
filled after labour, because then they have more room to dilate 
than when the child was in the womb, by which they 
were compressed; and also, because nourishment and matter, 
contained as well in them as in the stomach, have been 
so confusedly agitated from side to side during the pains of 
labour, by the throes which always must compress the belly, 
that they could not be well digested, whence the wind is 
afterwards generated and, by consequence, the gripes which 
the woman feels running into her belly from side to side, 
according as the wind moves more or less, and sometimes 
likewise from the womb, because of the compression and 
commotion which the bowels make. This being generally 
the case, let us now apply a suitable remedy. 

1. Boil an egg soft, and pour out the yolk of it, with which 
mix a spoonful of cinnamon water, and let her drink it; and 
if you mix in it two grains of ambergris, it will be better; and 
yet vervain taken in anything she drinks, will be as effectual 
as the other. 
2. Give a lying-in woman, immediately after delivery, oil of 
sweet almonds and syrup of maiden-hair mixed together. 
Some prefer oil of walnuts, provided it be made of nuts that 
are very good; but it tastes worse than the other at best. This 
will lenify the inside of the intestines by its unctuousness, 
and by that means bring away that which is contained in 
them more easily. 
3. Take and boil onions well in water, then stamp them with 
167 



The Works of Aristotle 

oil of cinnamon, spread them on a cloth, and apply them to 
the region of the womb. 

4. Let her be careful to keep her belly warm, and not to 
drink what is too cold; and if the pain prove violent, hot 
cloths from time to time must be laid on her belly, or a pancake 
fried in walnut oil may be applied to it, without swathing 
her belly too strait. And for the better evacuating the 
wind out of the intestines, give her a clyster, which may be 
repeated as often as necessity requires. 
5. Take bay-berries, beat them to a powder, put the powder 
upon a chafing-dish of coals, and let her receive the smoke 
of them up her privities. 
6. Take tar and bear’s grease, of each an equal quantity, boil 
them together, and whilst it is boiling, add a little pigeon’s 
dung to it. Spread some of this upon a linen cloth, and apply 
it to the veins of the back of her that is troubled with 
afterpains, and it will give her speedy ease. 
Lastly, let her take half a drachm of bay-berries beaten into 

a powder, in a drachm of muscadel or teat. 

II. Another accident to which women in child-bed are subject 
is haemorrhoids or piles, occasioned through the great 
straining in bringing the child into the world. To cure this, 
1. Let her be let blood in the saphoena vein. 
2. Let her use polypodium in her meat, and drink, bruised 
and boiled. 
3. Take an onion, and having made a hole in the middle, of 
it, fill it full of oil, roast it and having bruised it all together, 
apply it to the fundament. 
4. Take a dozen of snails without shells, if you can get them, 
or else so many shell snails, and pull them out, and having 
bruised them with a little oil, apply them warm as before. 
5. If she go not well to stool, let her take an ounce of cassia 
fistula drawn at night, going to bed; she needs no change of 
168 



The Works of Aristotle 

diet after. 

III. Retention of the menses is another accident happening 
to women in child-bed, and which is of so dangerous a consequence, 
that, if not timely remedied, it proves mortal. When 
this happens, 
1. Let the woman take such medicines as strongly provoke 
the terms, such as dittany, betony, pennyroyal, feverfew, centaury, 
juniper-berries, peony roots. 
2. Let her take two or three spoonfuls of briony water each 
morning. 
3. Gentian roots beaten into a powder, and a drachm of it 
taken every morning in wine, are an extraordinary remedy. 
4. The roots of birthwort, either long or round, so used and 
taken as the former, are very good. 
5. Take twelve peony seeds, and beat them into a very fine 
powder, and let her drink them in a draught of hot cardus 
posset, and let her sweat after. And if the last medicine do 
not bring them down the first time she takes it, let her take 
as much more three hours after, and it seldom fails. 

IV. Overflowing of the menses is another accident incidental 
to child-bed women. For which, 
1. Take shepherd’s purse, either boiled in any convenient 
liquor, or dried and beaten into a powder, and it will be an 
admirable remedy to stop them, this being especially appropriated 
to the privities. 
2. The flower and leaves of brambles or either of them, being 
dried and beaten into a powder, and a drachm of them 
taken every morning in a spoonful of red wine, or in a decoction 
of leaves of the same (which, perhaps, is much better), 
is an admirable remedy for the immoderate flowing of 
the term in women. 
V. Excoriations, bruises, and rents in the lower part of the 
169 



The Works of Aristotle 

womb are often occasioned by the violent distention and 
separation of the caruncles in a woman’s labour. For the healing 
whereof, 

As soon as the woman is laid, if there be only simple contusions 
and excoriations, then let the anodyne cataplasm, 
formerly directed, be applied to the lower parts to ease the 
pain, made of the yolks and whites of new laid eggs, and oil 
of roses, boiled a little over warm embers, continually stirring 
it until it be mixed, and then spread on a fine cloth; it 
must be applied very warm to the bearing place for five or 
six hours, and when it is taken away, lay some fine rags, dipped 
in oil of St. John’s wort twice or thrice a day; also foment the 
parts with barley water and honey of roses, to cleanse them 
from the excrements which pass. When the woman makes 
water, let them be defended with fine rags, and thereby hinder 
the urine from causing smart or pain. 

VI. The curding and clotting of the milk is another accident 
that happens to women in child-bed, for in the beginning of 
child-bed, the woman’s milk is not purified because of the 
great commotions her body suffered during her labour, which 
affected all the parts, and it is then affected with many 
humours. Now this clotting of the milk does, for the most 
part, proceed from the breasts not being fully drawn, and 
that, either because she has too much milk, and that the 
infant is too small and weak to suck it all, or because she 
doth not desire to be a nurse, for the milk in those cases 
remaining in the breasts after concoction, without being 
drawn, loses its sweetness and the balsamic qualities it had, 
and by reason of the heat it requires, and the too long stay it 
makes there, is sours, curds and clots, in like manner as we 
see rennet put into ordinary milk to turn it into curds. The 
curding of the milk may also be caused by having taken a 
great cold, and not keeping the breasts well covered. 

But from what cause so ever this curding of the milk proceeds, 
the most certain remedy is, to draw the breasts until it 
is emitted and dried. But in regard that the infant by reason 
of weakness, cannot draw strength enough, the woman being 
hard marked when her milk is curded, it will be most 
proper to get another woman to draw her breasts until the 
milk comes freely, and then she may give her child suck. 

170 



The Works of Aristotle 

And that she may not afterwards be troubled with a surplus 
of milk, she must eat such diet as give but little nourishment, 
and keep her body open. 

But if the case be such that the woman neither can nor will 
be a nurse, it is necessary to apply other remedies for the 
curing of this distemper; for then it will be best not to draw 
the breasts, for that will be the way to bring more milk into 
them. For which purpose it will be necessary to empty the 
body by bleeding the arms, besides which, let the humours 
be drawn down by strong clysters and bleeding at the foot; 
nor will it be amiss to purge gently, and to digest, dissolve 
and dissipate the curded milk, four brans dissolved in a decoction 
of sage, milk, smallage and fennel, mixing with it oil 
of camomile, with which oil let the breasts be well anointed. 
The following liniment is also good to scatter and dissipate 
the milk. 

A Liniment to Scatter and Dissipate the Milk 

That the milk flowing back to the breast may without of


fence be dissipated, you must use this ointment:—”Take pure 
wax, two ounces, linseed, half a pound; when the wax is 
melted, let the liniment be made, wherein linen cloths must 
be clipped, and, according to their largeness, be laid upon 
the breasts; and when it shall be dispersed, and pains no 
more, let other linen cloths be laid in the distilled water of 
acorns, and put upon them. 

Note.—That the cloths dipped into distilled water of acorns 
must be used only by those who cannot nurse their own 
children; but if a swelling in the breast of her who gives such 
do arise, from abundance of milk, threatens an inflammation, 
let her use the former ointment, but abstain from using 
the distilled water of acorns. 

171 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER VIII 


Directions for the Nurses, in ordering Newly-born 
Children 


WHEN THE CHILD’S navel-string hath been cut according to 
the rules prescribed, let the midwife presently cleanse it from 
the excrements and filth it brings into the world with it; of 
which some are within the body, as the urine in the bladder, 
and the excrements found in the guts; and the others without, 
which are thick, whitish and clammy, proceeding from 
the sliminess of the waters. There are sometimes children 
covered all over with this, that one would think they were 
rubbed over with soft cheese, and some women are of so 
easy a belief, that they really think it so, because they have 
eaten some while they were with child. From these excrements 
let the child be cleansed with wine and water a little 
warmed, washing every part therewith, but chiefly the head 
because of the hair, also the folds of the groin, and the cods 
or privities; which parts must be gently cleansed with a linen 
rag, or a soft sponge dipped in lukewarm wine. If this clammy 

or viscous excrement stick so close that it will not easily be 
washed off from those places, it may be fetched off with oil 
of sweet almond, or a little fresh butter melted with wine, 
and afterwards well dried off; also make tents of fine rags, 
and wetting them in this liquor, clear the ears and nostrils; 
but for the eyes, wipe them only with a dry, soft rag, not 
dipping it in the wine, lest it should make them smart. 

The child being washed, and cleansed from the native blood 
and impurities which attend it into the world, it must in the 
next place be searched to see whether all things be right about 
it, and that there is no fault nor dislocation; whether its nose 
be straight, or its tongue tied, or whether there be any bruise 
or tumour of the head; or whether the mold be not over 
shot; also whether the scrotum (if it be a male) be not blown 
up and swelled, and, in short, whether it has suffered any 
violence by its birth, in any part of its body, and whether all 
the parts be well and duly shaped; that suitable remedies 
may be applied if anything be found not right. Nor is it 
enough to see that all be right without, and that the outside 
of the body be cleansed, but she must also observe whether 
it dischargeth the excrements contained within, and whether 

172 



The Works of Aristotle 

the passage be open; for some have been born without having 
been perforated. Therefore, let her examine whether the 
conduits of the urine and stool be clear, for want of which 
some have died, not being able to void their excrements, 
because timely care was not taken at first. As to the urine all 
children, as well males as females, do make water as soon as 
they are born, if they can, especially if they feel the heat of 
the fire, and also sometimes void the excrements, but not so 
soon as the urine. If the infant does not ordure the first day, 
then put into its fundament a small suppository, to stir it up 
to be discharged, that it may not cause painful gripes, by 
remaining so long in the belly. A sugar almond may be proper 
for this purpose, anointed all over with a little boiled honey; 
or else a small piece of castile-soap rubbed over with fresh 
butter; also give the child for this purpose a little syrup of 
roses or violets at the mouth, mixed with some oil of sweet 
almonds, drawn without a fire, anointing the belly also, with 
the same oil or fresh butter. 

The midwife having thus washed and cleansed the child, 
according to the before mentioned directions, let her begin 
to swaddle it in swathing clothes, and when she dresses the 

head, let her put small rags behind the ears, to dry up the 
filth which usually engenders there, and so let her do also in 
the folds of the armpits and groins, and so swathe it; then 
wrap it up warm in a bed with blankets, which there is scarcely 
any woman so ignorant but knows well enough how to do; 
only let me give them this caution, that they swathe not the 
child too tightly in its blankets, especially about the breast 
and stomach, that it may breathe the more freely, and not be 
forced to vomit up the milk it sucks, because the stomach 
cannot be sufficiently distended to contain it; therefore let 
its arms and legs be wrapped in its bed, stretched and straight 
and swathed to keep them so, viz., the arms along its sides, 
and its legs equally both together with a little of the bed 
between them, that they may not be galled by rubbing each 
other; then let the head be kept steady and straight, with a 
stay fastened each side of the blanket, and then wrap the 
child up in a mantle and blankets to keep it warm. Let none 
think this swathing of the infant is needless to set down, for 
it is necessary it should be thus swaddled, to give its little 
body a straight figure, which is most proper and decent for a 
man, and to accustom him to keep upon his feet, who other


173 



The Works of Aristotle 

wise would go upon all fours, as most animals do. CHAPTER IX 

SECTION I.—Of Gripes and Pains in the, Bellies of Young 
Children 

THIS I MENTION FIRST, as it is often the first and most common 
distemper which happens to little infants, after their 
birth; many children being so troubled therewith, that it 
causes them to cry day and night and at last die of it. The 
cause of it for the most part comes from the sudden change 
of nourishment, for having always received it from the umbilical 
vessel whilst in the mother’s womb, they come on a 
sudden not only to change the manner of receiving it, but 
the nature and quality of what they received, as soon as they 
are born; for instead of purified blood only, which was conveyed 
to them by means of the umbilical vein, they are now 
obliged to be nourished by their mother’s milk, which they 
suck with their mouths, and from which are engendered many 
excrements, causing gripes and pains; and not only because 
it is not so pure as the blood with which it was nourished in 
the womb, but because the stomach and the intestines can


174 



The Works of Aristotle 

not make a good digestion, being unaccustomed to it. It is 
sometimes caused also by a rough phlegm, and sometimes 
by worms; for physicians affirm that worms have been bred 
in children even in their mother’s belly. 

Cure. The remedy must be suited to the cause. If it proceed 
from the too sudden change of nourishment, the remedy 
must be to forbear giving the child suck for some days, 
lest the milk be mixed with phlegm, which is then in the 
stomach corrupt; and at first it must suck but little, until it is 
accustomed to digest it. If it be the excrements in the intestines, 
which by their long stay increase their pains, give them 
at the month a little oil of sweet almonds and syrup of roses; 
if it be worms, lay a cloth dipped in oil of wormwood mixed 
with ox-gall, upon the belly, or a small cataplasm, mixed 
with the powder of rue, wormwood, coloquintida, aloes, and 
the seeds of citron incorporated with ox-gall and the powder 
of lupines. Or give it oil of sweet almonds and syrup of roses; 
if it be worms, lay a cloth, dipped in oil of wormwood mixed 
with ox-gall, upon the belly, or a small cataplasm mixed with 
the powder of rue, wormwood, coloquintida, aloes, and the 
seeds of citron incorporated with ox-gall and the powder of 

lupines. Or give it oil of sweet almonds with sugar-candy, 
and a scruple of aniseed; it purgeth new-born babes from 
green cholera and stinking phlegm, and, if it be given with 
sugar-pap, it allays the griping pains of the belly. Also anoint 
the belly with oil of dill, or lay pelitory stamped with oil of 
camomile to the belly. 

SECT. II.—Of Weakness In Newly-born Infants. 

Weakness is an accident that many children bring into the 
world along with them, and is often occasioned by the labour 
of the mother; by the violence and length whereof they suffer 
so much, that they are born with great weakness, and 
many times it is difficult to know whether they are alive or 
dead, their body appearing so senseless, and their face so 
blue and livid, that they seem to be quite choked; and even 
after some hours, then-showing any signs of life is attended 
with weakness, that it looks like a return from death, and 
that they are still in a dying condition. 

Cure. Lay the infant speedily in a warm blanket, and carry 

175 



The Works of Aristotle 

it to the fire, and then let the midwife take a little wine in her 
mouth and spout it into its mouth, repeating it often, if there 
be occasion. Let her apply linen dipped in urine to the breast 
and belly, and let the face be uncovered, that it may breathe 
the more freely; also, let the midwife keep its mouth a little 
open, cleanse the nostrils with small linen tents11 dipt in white 
wine, that so it may receive the smell of it; and let her chafe 
every part of its body well with warm cloths, to bring back its 
blood and spirits, which being retired inwards through weakness, 
often puts him in danger of being choked. By the application 
of these means, the infant will gradually recover strength, 
and begin to stir its limbs by degrees, and at length to cry; and 
though it be but weakly at first, yet afterwards, as it breathes 
more freely, its cry will become more strong. 

11 Tent (surgical). A bunch of some fibre such as sponge or 
horsehair introduced into an opening, natural or artificial, 
to keep it open, or increase its calibre. 

SECT. III.—Of the Fundament being closed up in a newly-
born Infant. 

Another defect that new-born infants are liable to is, to have 
their fundaments closed up, by which they can neither evacuate 
the new excrements engendered by the milk they suck, 
nor that which was amassed in their intestines before birth, 
which is certainly mortal without a speedy remedy. There 
have been some female children who have their fundaments 
quite closed, and yet have voided the excrements of the guts 
by an orifice which nature, to supply the defect, had made 
within the neck of the womb. 

Cure. Here we must take notice, that the fundament is 
closed two ways; either by a single skin, through which one 
may discover some black and blue marks, proceeding from 
the excrements retained, which, if one touch with the finger, 
there is a softness felt within, and thereabout it ought to be 
pierced; or else it is quite stopped by a thick, fleshy substance, 
in such sort that there appears nothing without, by 
which its true situation may be known. When there is nothing 
but the single skin which makes the closure, the opera


176 



The Works of Aristotle 

tion is very easy, and the children may do very well; for then 
an aperture or opening may be made with a small incision-
knife, cross-ways, that it may the better receive a round form, 
and that the place may not afterwards grow together, taking 
care not to prejudice the sphincter or muscle of the rectum. 
The incision being thus made, the excrements will certainly 
have issue. But if, by reason of their long stay in the belly, 
they become so dry that the infant cannot void them, then 
let a clyster be given to moisten and bring them away; afterwards 
put a linen tent into the new-made fundament, which 
at first had best be anointed with honey of roses, and towards 
the end, with a drying, cicatrizing ointment, such as 
unguentum album or ponphilex, observing to cleanse the 
infant of its excrement, and dry it again as soon and as often 
as it evacuates them, that so the aperture may be prevented 
from turning into a malignant ulcer. 

But if the fundament be stopped up in such a manner, 
that neither mark nor appearance of it can be seen or felt, 
then the operation is much more difficult, and, even when it 
is done, the danger is much greater that the infant will not 
survive it. Then, if it be a female, and it sends forth its excre


ments by the way I mentioned before, it is better not to 
meddle than, by endeavouring to remedy an inconvenience, 
run an extreme hazard of the infant’s death. But when there 
is no vent for the excrements, without which death is unavoidable, 
then the operation is justifiable. 

Operation. Let the operator, with a small incision-knife that 
hath but one edge, enter into the void place, and turning the 
back of it upwards, within half a finger’s breadth of the child’s 
rump, which is the place where he will certainly find the 
intestines, let him thrust it forward, that it may be open 
enough to give free vent to matter there contained, being 
especially careful of the sphincter; after which, let the wound 
be dressed according to the method directed. 

SECT. IV.—Of the Thrush, or Ulcers In the Mouth of the 
Infant. 

The thrush is a distemper that children are very subject to, 
and it arises from bad milk, or from foul humour in the 
stomach; for sometimes, though there be no ill humour in 

177 



The Works of Aristotle 

the milk itself, yet it may corrupt the child’s stomach because 
of its weakness or some other indisposition; in which, 
acquiring an acrimony, instead of being well digested, there 
arise from it thrice biting vapours, which forming a thick 
viscosity, do thereby produce this distemper. 

Cure. It is often difficult, as physicians tell us, because it is 
seated in hot and moist places, where the putrefaction is easily 
augmented; and because the remedies applied cannot lodge 
there, being soon washed with spittle. But if it arises from 
too hot quality in the nurse’s milk, care must be taken to 
temper and cool, prescribing her cool diet, bleeding and 
purging her also, if there be occasion. 

Take lentils, husked, powder them, and lay a little of them 
upon the child’s gums. Or take bdellium flowers, half an 
ounce, and with oil of roses make a liniment. Also wash the 
child’s mouth with barley and plantain-water, and honey of 
roses, mixing with them a little verjuice of lemons, as well to 
loosen and cleanse the vicious humours which cleave to the 
inside of the infant’s mouth, as to cool those parts which are 
already over-heated. It may be done by means of a small fine 
rag, fastened to the end of a little stick, and dipped therein, 

wherewith the ulcers may be gently rubbed, being careful 
not to put the child in too much pain, lest an inflammation 
make the distemper worse. The child’s body must also be 
kept open, that the humours being carried to the lower parts, 
the vapours may not ascend, as is usual for them to do when 
the body is costive, and the excrements too long retained. 

If the ulcers appear malignant, let such remedies be used 
as do their work speedily, that the evil qualities that cause 
them, being thereby instantly corrected, their malignity may 
be prevented; and in this case, touch the ulcers with plantain 
water, sharpened with spirits of vitriol; for the remedy must 
be made sharp, according to the malignity of the distemper. 
It will be necessary to purge these ill humours out of the 
whole habit of the child, by giving half an ounce of succory 
and rhubarb. 

SECT. V.—Of Pains in the Ears, Inflammation, Moisture, etc. 

The brain in infants is very moist, and hath many excrements 
which nature cannot send out at the proper passages; 

178 



The Works of Aristotle 

they get often to the ears, and there cause pains, flux of blood, 
with inflammation and matter with pain; this in children is 
hard to be known as they have no other way to make it known 
but by constant crying; you will perceive them ready to feel 
their ears themselves, but will not let others touch them, if 
they can prevent; and sometimes you may discern the parts 
about the ears to be very red. 

These pains, if let alone, are of dangerous consequences, 
because they may bring forth watchings and epilepsy; for 
the moisture breeds worms there, and fouls the spongy bones, 
and by degrees causes incurable deafness. 

Cure. Allay the pain with all convenient speed, but have a 
care of using strong remedies. Therefore, only use warm milk 
about the ears, with the decoction of poppy tops, or oil of 
violets; to take away the moisture, use honey of roses, and let 
aqua mollis be dropped into the ears; or take virgin honey, 
half an ounce; red wines two ounces; alum, saffron, saltpetre, 
each a drachm, mix them at the fire; or drop in hemp 
seed oil with a little wine. 

SECT. VI.—Of Redness and Inflammation of the Buttocks, 
Groin and the Thighs of a Young Child. 

If there be no great care taken to change and wash the child’s 
bed as soon as it is fouled with the excrements, and to keep 
the child very clean, the acrimony will be sure to cause redness, 
and beget a smarting in the buttocks, groin and thighs 
of the child, which, by reason of the pain, will afterwards be 
subject to inflammations, which follow the sooner, through 
the delicacy and tenderness of their skin, from which the 
outward skin of the body is in a short time separated and 
worn away. 

Cure. First, keep the child cleanly, and secondly, take off 
the sharpness of its urine. As to keeping it cleanly, she must 
be a sorry nurse who needs to be taught how to do it; for if 
she lets it but have dry, warm and clean beds and cloths, as 
often and as soon as it has fouled and wet them, either by its 
urine or its excrements, it will be sufficient. And as to taking 
off the sharpness of the child’s urine, that must be done by 
the nurse’s taking a cool diet, that her milk may have the 
same quality; and, therefore, she ought to abstain from all 

179 



The Works of Aristotle 

things that may tend to heat it. 

But besides these, cooling and drying remedies are requisite 
to be applied to the inflamed parts; therefore let the parts 
be bathed in plantain-water, with a fourth of lime water added 
to it, each time the child’s excrements are wiped off; and if 
the pain be very great, let it only be fomented with lukewarm 
milk. The powder of a post to dry it, or a little mill-
dust strewed upon the parts affected, may be proper enough, 
and is used by many women. Also, unguentum album, or 
diapompholigos, spread upon a small piece of leather in form 
of a plaster, will not be amiss. 

But the chief thing must be, the nurse’s taking great care to 
wrap the inflamed parts with fine rags when she opens the 
child, that these parts may not gather and be pained by rubbing 
together. 

SECT. VII.—Of Vomiting in Young Children. 

Vomiting in young children proceeds sometimes from too 
much milk, and sometimes from bad milk, and as often from 

a moist, loose stomach; for as dryness retains so looseness 
lets go. This is, for the most part, without danger in children; 
for they that vomit from their birth are the lustiest; for 
the stomach not being used to meat, and milk being taken 
too much, crudities are easily bred, or the milk is corrupted; 
and it is better to vomit these up than to keep them in; but if 
vomiting last long, it will cause an atrophy or consumption, 
for want of nourishment. 

Cure. If this be from too much milk, that which is emitted 
is yellow and green, or otherwise ill-coloured and stinking; 
in this case, mend the milk, as has been shown before; cleanse 
the child with honey of roses, and strengthen its stomach 
with syrup of milk and quinces, made into an electuary. If 
the humours be hot and sharp, give the syrup of pomegranates, 
currants and coral, and apply to the belly the plaster of 
bread, the stomach cerate, or bread dipped in hot wine; or 
take oil of mastich, quinces, mint, wormwood, each half an 
ounce; of nutmegs by expression, half a drachm; chemical 
oil of mint, three drops. Coral hath an occult property to 
prevent vomiting, and is therefore hung about the neck. 

180 



The Works of Aristotle 

SECT. VIII—Of Breeding Teeth in Young Children. 

This is a very great and yet necessary evil in all children, 
having variety of symptoms joined with it. They begin to 
come forth, not all at once, but one after the other, about 
the sixth or seventh month; the fore-teeth coming first, then 
the eye-teeth, and last of all the grinders. The eye-teeth cause 
more pain to the child than any of the rest, because they 
have a deep root, and a small nerve which has communication 
with that which makes the eye move. 

In the breeding of the teeth, first they feel an itching in 
their gums, then they are pierced as with a needle, and pricked 
by the sharp bones, whence proceed great pains, watching, 
inflammation of the gums, fever, looseness and convulsions, 
especially when they breed their eye-teeth. 

The signs when children breed their eye-teeth are these: 

1. It is known by the time, which is usually about the seventh 
month. 
2. Their gums are swelled, and they feel a great heat there 
with an itching, which makes them put their fingers into 
their mouths to rub them; a moisture also distils from the 
gums into the mouth, because of the pain they feel there. 

3. They hold the nipple faster than before. 
4. The gums are white when the teeth begin to come, and 
the nurse, in giving them suck, finds the mouth hotter, and 
that they are much changed, crying every moment, and cannot 
sleep, or but very little at a time. 
The fever that follows breeding of teeth comes from choleric 
humours, inflamed by watching, pain and heat. And 
the longer teeth are breeding, the more dangerous it is; so 
that many in the breeding of them, die of fevers and convulsions. 


Cure. Two things are to be regarded:—one is, to preserve 
the child from the evil accidents that may happen to it by 
reason of the great pain; the other, to assist as much as may 
be, the cutting of the teeth, when they can hardly cut the 
gums themselves. 

181 



The Works of Aristotle 

For the first of these, viz., the preventing of those accidents 
to the child, the nurse ought to take great care to keep a good 
diet, and to use all things that may cool and temper her milk, 
that so a fever may not follow the pain of the teeth. And to 
prevent the humour falling too much upon the inflamed gums, 
let the child’s belly be always kept loose by gentle clysters, if he 
be bound; though oftentimes there is no need of them, because 
they are at those times usually troubled with a looseness; 
and yet, for all that, clysters may not be improper. 

As to the other, which is to assist it cutting the teeth, that 
the nurse must do from time to time by mollifying and loosening 
them, and by rubbing them with her finger dipped in 
butter or honey; or let the child have a virgin-wax candle to 
chew upon; or anoint the gums with the mucilage of quince 
made with mallow-water, or with the brains of a hare; also 
foment the cheeks with the decoction of althoea, and camomile 
flowers and dill, or with the juice of mallows and fresh 
butter. If the gums are inflamed, add juice of nightshade and 
lettuce. I have already said, the nurse ought to take a temperate 
diet; I shall now only add, that barley-broth, water-gruel, 
raw eggs, prunes, lettuce and endive, are good for her; but let 

her avoid salt, sharp, biting and peppered meats, and wine. 

SECT. IX.—Of the Flux of the Betty, or Looseness in Infants. 


It is very common for infants to have the flux of the belly, or 
looseness, especially upon the least indisposition; nor is it to 
be wondered at, seeing their natural moistness contributes 
so much thereto; and even if it be extraordinarily violent, 
such are in a better state of health than those that are bound. 
The flux, if violent, proceeds from divers causes, as 1. From 
breeding of the teeth, and is then commonly attended with 
a fever in which the concoction is hindered, and the nourishment 
corrupted. 2. From watching. 3. From pain. 4. From 
stirring up of the humours by a fever. 5. When they suck or 
drink too much in a fever. Sometimes they have a flux without 
breeding of teeth, from inward cold in the guts or stomach 
that obstructs concoction. If it be from the teeth, it is 
easily known; for the signs of breeding in teeth will discover 
it. If it be from external cold, there are signs of other causes. 

182 



The Works of Aristotle 

If from a humour flowing from the head there are signs of a 
catarrh, and the excrements are frothy. If crude and raw 
humours are voided, and there be wind, belching, and phlegmatic 
excrements, or if they be yellow, green and stink, the 
flux is from a hot and sharp humour. It is best in breeding of 
teeth when the belly is loose, as I have said before; but if it be 
too violent, and you are afraid it may end in a consumption, 
it must be stopped; and if the excrements that are voided be 
black, and attended with a fever, it is very bad. 

Cure. The remedy in this case, is principally in respect to 
the nurse, and the condition of the milk must be chiefly 
observed; the nurse must be cautioned that she eat no green 
fruit, nor things of hard concoction. If the child suck not, 
remove the flux with such purges as leave a cooling quality 
behind them, as syrup of honey or roses, or a clyster. Take 
the decoction of millium, myrobolans, of each two or three 
ounces, with an ounce or two of syrup of roses, and make a 
clyster. After cleansing, if it proceed from a hot cause, give 
syrup of dried roses, quinces, myrtles and a little sanguis 
draconis. Also anoint with oil of roses, myrtles, mastich, each 
two drachms; with oil of myrtles and wax make an oint


ment. Or take red roses and moulin, of each a handful; cypress 
roots two drachms; make a bag, boil it in red wine and 
apply it to the belly. Or use the plaster bread or stomach 
ointment. If the cause be cold, and the excrements white 
give syrup of mastich and quinces, with mint-water. Use 
outwardly, mint, mastich, cummin; or take rose seeds, an 
ounce, cummin, aniseed, each two drachms; with oil of mastich, 
wormwood and wax, make an ointment. 

SECT. X.—Of the Epilepsy and Convulsions in Children. 

This is a distemper that is often fatal to young children, and 
frequently proceeds from the brain, originating either from 
the parents, or from vapours, or bad humours that twitch 
the membranes of the brain; it is also sometimes caused by 
other distempers and by bad diet; likewise, the toothache, 
when the brain consents, causes it, and so does a sudden 
fright. As to the distemper itself, it is manifest and well enough 
known where it is; and as to the cause whence it comes, you 
may know by the signs of the disease, whether it comes from 

183 



The Works of Aristotle 

bad milk, or worms, or teeth; if these are all absent, it is 
certain that the brain is first affected; if it come with the 
small-pox or measles, it ceaseth when they come forth, if 
nature be strong enough. 

Cure. For the remedy of this grievous, and often mortal 
distemper, give the following powder to prevent it, to a child 
as soon as it is born:—Take male peony roots, gathered in 
the decrease of the moon, a scruple; with leaf gold make a 
powder; or take peony roots, a drachm; peony seeds, mistletoe 
of the oak, elk’s hoof, man’s skull, amber, each a scruple; 
musk, two grains; make a powder. The best part of the cure 
is taking care of the nurse’s diet, which must be regular, by 
all means. If it be from corrupt milk, provoke a vomit; to do 
which, hold down the tongue, and put a quill dipped in 
sweet almonds, down the throat. If it come from the worms, 
give such things as will kill the worms. If there be a fever, 
with respect to that also, give coral smaragad and elk’s hoof. 
In the fit, give epileptic water, as lavender water, and rub 
with oil of amber, or hang a peony root, and elk’s hoof 
smaragad, about the child’s neck. 

As to a convulsion, it is when the brain labours to cast out 

that which troubles it; the mariner is in the marrow of the 
back, and fountain of the nerves; it is a stubborn disease, 
and often kills. 

Wash the body, when in the fit, with decoction of althoea, 
lily roots, peony and camomile flowerets, and anoint it with 
man’s and goose’s grease, oils of worms, orris, lilies, foxes, 
turpentine, mastich, storax and calamint. The sun flower is 
also very good, boiled in water, to wash the child. 

184 



The Works of Aristotle 

PROPER AND SAFE REMEDIES 
FOR 
CURING ALL THOSE DISTEMPERS 
THAT ARE PECULIAR 
TO THE FEMALE SEX 
AND ESPECIALLY THOSE OBSERVATIONS 
TO BEARING OF CHILDREN 
BOOK II 


HAVING FINISHED the first part of this book, and wherein, I 
hope, amply made good my promise to the reader, I am now 
come to treat only of those distempers to which they are 
more subject when in a breeding condition, and those that 
keep them from being so; together with such proper and 
safe remedies as may be sufficient to repel them. And since 
amongst all the diseases to which human nature is subject, 
there is none that more diametrically opposes the very end 
of our creation, and the design of nature in the formation of 
different sexes, and the power thereby given us for the work 
of generation, than that of sterility or barrenness which, where 
it prevails, renders the most accomplished midwife but a 

useless person, and destroys the design of our book; I think, 
therefore, that barrenness is an effect that deserves our first 
and principal consideration. 

CHAPTER I 

Of Barrenness; its several Kinds; with the proper 
Remedies for it; and the Signs of Insufficiency both 
in Men and Women. 

SECTION I.—Of Barrenness in General. 

BARRENNESS is either natural or artificial. 

Natural barrenness is when a woman is barren, though the 
instruments of generation are perfect both in herself and in 
her husband, and no preposterous or diabolical course used 
to it, and neither age, nor disease, nor any defect hindering, 
and yet the woman remains naturally barren. 

Now this may proceed from a natural cause, for if the man 
and woman be of one complexion, they seldom have chil


185 



The Works of Aristotle 

dren, and the reason is clear, for the universal course of nature 
being formed of a composition of contraries, cannot be 
increased by a composition of likes; and, therefore, if the 
constitution of the woman be hot and dry, as well as the 
man’s there can be no conception; and if, on the contrary, 
the man should be of a cold and moist constitution, as well 
as the woman, the effect would be the same; and this barrenness 
is purely natural. The only way to help this is, for people, 
before they marry, to observe each others constitution and 
complexion, if they design to have children. If their complexions 
and constitutions be alike, they are not fit to come 
together, for discordant natures only, make harmony in the 
work of generation. 

Another natural cause of barrenness, is want of love between 
man and wife. Love is that vivid principle that ought 
to inspire each organ in the act of generation, or else it will 
be spiritless and dull; for if their hearts be not united in love, 
how should their seed unite to cause Conception? And this 
is sufficiently evinced, in that there never follows conception 
on a rape. Therefore, if men and women design to have 
children, let them live so, that their hearts as well as their 

bodies may be united, or else they may miss their expectations. 


A third cause of natural barrenness, is the letting virgins 
blood in the arm before their natural courses are come down, 
which is usually in the fourteenth and fifteenth year of their 
age; sometimes, perhaps before the thirteenth, but never 
before the twelfth. And because usually, they are out of order, 
and indisposed before their purgations come down, their 
parents run to the doctor to know what is the matter; and 
he, if not skilled, will naturally prescribe opening a vein in 
the arm, thinking fullness of blood the cause; and thus she 
seems recovered for the present: and when the young virgin 
happens to be in the same disorder, the mother applies again 
to the surgeon, who uses the same remedy; and by these 
means the blood is so diverted from its proper channel, that 
it comes not down the womb as usual, and so the womb 
dries up, and she is for ever barren. To prevent this, let no 
virgin blood in the arm before her courses come down well; 
for that will bring the blood downwards, and by that means 
provoke the menstrua to come down. 

Another cause of natural barrenness, is debility in copula


186 



The Works of Aristotle 

tion. If persons perform not that act with all the bent and 
ardour that nature requires, they may as well let it alone; for 
frigidity and coldness never produces conception. Of the cure 
of this we will speak by and by, after I have spoken of accidental 
barrenness, which is occasioned by some morbific 
matter or infirmity in the body, either of the man or of the 
woman, which being removed they become fruitful. And 
since, as I have before noted, the first and great law of creation, 
was to increase and multiply, and barrenness is in direct 
opposition to that law, and frustrates the end of our 
creation, and often causes man and wife to have hard thoughts 
one of another, I shall here, for the satisfaction of well meaning 
people, set down the signs and causes of insufficiency 
both in men and women; premising first that when people 
have no children, they must not presently blame either party, 
for neither may be in fault. 

SECT. II.—Signs and Causes of Insufficiency in Men. 

One cause may be in some viciousness of the yard, as if the 

same be crooked, or any ligaments thereof distorted and broken, 
whereby the ways and passages, through which the seed 
should flow, come to be stopped or vitiated. 

Another cause may be, too much weakness of the yard, 
and tenderness thereof, so that it is not strong enough erected 
to inject seed into the womb; for the strength and stiffness 
of the yard very much conduces to conception, by reason of 
the forcible injection of the seed. 

Also, if the stones have received any hurt, so that they cannot 
exercise the proper gift in producing seed, or if they be 
oppressed with an inflammation, tumour, wound or ulcer, 
or drawn up within the belly, and not appearing outwardly. 

Also, a man may be barren by reason of the defect of seed, 
as first, if he cast forth no seed at all, or less in substance than 
is needful. Or, secondly, if the seed be vicious, or unfit for 
generation; as on the one side, it happens in bodies that are 
gross and fat, the matter of it being defective; and on the 
other side, too much leanness, or continual wasting or consumption 
of the body, destroys seed; nature turning all the 
matter and substance thereof into the nutriment of the body. 

Too frequent copulation is also one great cause of barren


187 



The Works of Aristotle 

ness in men; for it attracteth the seminal moisture from the 
stones, before it is sufficiently prepared and concocted. So if 
any one, by daily copulation, do exhaust and draw out all 
their moisture of the seed, then do the stones draw the moist 
humours from the superior veins unto themselves; and so, 
having but a little blood in them, they are forced of necessity 
to cast it out raw and unconcocted, and thus the stones are 
violently deprived of the moisture of their veins, and the 
superior veins, and all the other parts of the body, of their 
vital spirits; therefore it is no wonder that those who use 
immoderate copulation are very weak in their bodies, seeing 
their whole body is deprived of the best and purest blood, 
and of the spirit, insomuch that many who have been too 
much addicted to that pleasure, have killed themselves in 
the very act. 

Gluttony, drunkenness, and other excesses, do so much 
hinder men from fruitfulness, that it makes them unfit for 
generation. 

But among other causes of barrenness of men, this also is 
one, and makes them almost of the nature of eunuchs, and 
that is the incision or the cutting of the veins behind their 

ears, which in case of distempers is oftentimes done; for, according 
to the opinions of most physicians and anatomists, 
the seed flows from the brain by those veins behind the ears, 
more than any part of the body. From whence it is very probable, 
that the transmission of the seed is hindered by the cutting 
of the veins behind the ears, so that it cannot descend to 
the testicles, or may come thither very crude and raw. 

SECT. III.—Signs and Causes of Insufficiency or Barrenness in 
Women. 

Although there are many causes of the barrenness of women, 
yet the chief and principal are internal, respecting either the 
privy parts, the womb or menstruous blood. 

Therefore, Hippocrates saith (speaking as well of easy as 
difficult conception in women) the first consideration is to 
be had of their species; for little women are more apt to conceive 
than great, slender than gross, white and fair than ruddy 
and high coloured, black than wan, those that have their 
veins conspicuous, than others; but to be very fleshy is evil, 

188 



The Works of Aristotle 

and to have great swelled breasts is good. 

The next thing to be considered is, the monthly purgations, 
whether they have been duly every month, whether 
they flow plentifully, are of a good colour, and whether they 
have been equal every month. 

Then the womb, or place of conception, is to be considered. 
It ought to be clean and sound, dry and soft, not retracted 
or drawn up; not prone or descending downward; 
nor the mouth thereof turned away, nor too close shut up. 
But to speak more particularly:— 

The first parts to be spoken of are the pudenda, or privities, 
and the womb; which parts are shut and enclosed either 
by nature or against nature; and from hence, such women 
are called imperforate; as in some women the mouth of their 
womb continues compressed, or closed up, from the time of 
their birth until the coming down of their courses, and then, 
on a sudden, when their terms press forward to purgation, 
they are molested with great and unusual pains. Sometimes 
these break of their own accord, others are dissected and 
opened by physicians; others never break at all, which bring 
on disorders that end in death. 

All these Aetius particularly handles, showing that the womb 
is shut three manner of ways, which hinders conception. And 
the first is when the pudenda grow and cleave together. The 
second is, when these certain membranes grow in the middle 
part of the matrix within. The third is, when (though the 
lips and bosom of the pudenda may appear fair and open), 
the mouth of the womb may be quite shut up. All which are 
occasions of barrenness, as they hinder the intercourse with 
man, the monthly courses, and conception. 

But amongst all causes of barrenness in women, the greatest 
is in the womb, which is the field of generation; and if this 
field is corrupt, it is in vain to expect any fruit, be it ever so 
well sown. It may be unfit for generation by reason of many 
distempers to which it is subject; as for instance, overmuch 
heat and overmuch cold; for women whose wombs are too 
thick and cold, cannot conceive, because coldness extinguishes 
the heat of the human seed. Immoderate moisture of the womb 
also destroys the seed of man, and makes it ineffectual, as corn 
sown in ponds and marshes; and so does overmuch dryness of 
the womb, so that the seed perisheth for want of nutriment. 
Immoderate heat of the womb is also a cause of barrenness for 

189 



The Works of Aristotle 

it scorcheth up the seed as corn sown in the drought of summer; 
for immoderate heat burns all parts of the body, so that 
no conception can live in the womb. 

When unnatural humours are engendered, as too much 
phlegm, tympanies, wind, water, worms, or any other evil 
humour abounding contrary to nature, it causes barrenness 
as do all terms not coming down in due order. 

A woman may also have accidental causes of barrenness 
(at least such as may hinder her conception), as sudden 
frights, anger, grief and perturbation of mind; too violent 
exercises, as leaping, dancing, running, after copulation, 
and the like. But I will now add some signs, by which these 
things may be known. 

If the cause of barrenness be in the man, through overmuch 
heat in the seed, the woman may easily feel that in 
receiving it. 

If the nature of the woman be too hot, and so unfit for 
conception, it will appear by her having her terms very little, 
and the colour inclining to yellowness; she is also very hasty, 
choleric and crafty; her pulse beats very swift, and she is very 
desirous of copulation. 

To know whether the fault is in the man or in the woman, 
sprinkle the man’s urine upon a lettuce leaf, and the woman’s 
urine upon another, and that which dries away first is unfruitful. 
Also take five wheaten corns and seven beans, put 
them into an earthen pot, and let the party make water 
therein; let this stand seven days, and if in that time they 
begin to sprout, then the party is fruitful; but if they sprout 
not, then the party is barren, whether it be the man or the 
woman; this is a certain sign. 

There are some that make this experiment of a woman’s 
fruitfulness; take myrrh, red storax and some odoriferous 
things, and make a perfume of which let the woman receive 
into the neck of the womb through a funnel; if the woman 
feels the smoke ascend through her body to the nose, then 
she is fruitful; otherwise she is barren. Some also take garlic 
and beer, and cause the woman to lie upon her back upon it, 
and if she feel the scent thereof in her nose, it is a sign of her 
being fruitful. 

Culpepper and others also give a great deal of credit to the 
following experiment. Take a handful of barley, and steep half 
of it in the urine of a man, and the other half in the urine of 

190 



The Works of Aristotle 

the woman, for the space of twenty-four hours; then take it 
out, and put the man’s by itself, and the woman’s by itself; set 
it in a flower-pot, or some other thing, where let it dry; water 
the man’s every morning with his own urine, and the woman’s 
with hers, and that which grows first is the most fruitful; but if 
they grow not at all, they are both naturally barren. 

Cure. If the barrenness proceeds from stoppage of the menstrua, 
let the woman sweat, for that opens the parts; and the 
best way to sweat is in a hot-house. Then let the womb be 
strengthened by drinking a draught of white wine, wherein 
a handful of stinking arrach, first bruised, has been boiled, 
for by a secret magnetic virtue, it strengthens the womb, and 
by a sympathetic quality, removes any disease thereof. To 
which add also a handful of vervain, which is very good to 
strengthen both the womb and the head, which are commonly 
afflicted together by sympathy. Having used these two 
or three days, if they come not down, take of calamint, pennyroyal, 
thyme, betony, dittany, burnet, feverfew, mugwort, 
sage, peony roots, juniper berries, half a handful of each, or 
as many as can be got; let these be boiled in beer, and taken 
for her drink. 

Take one part of gentian-root, two parts of centaury, distil 
them with ale in an alembic after you have bruised the gentian-
roots and infused them well. This water is an admirable 
remedy to provoke the terms. But if you have not this water 
in readiness, take a drachm of centaury, and half a drachm 
of gentian-roots bruised, boiled in posset drink, and drink 
half a drachm of it at night going to bed. Seed of wild navew 
beaten to powder, and a drachm of it taken in the morning 
in white wine, also is very good; but if it answers not, she 
must be let blood in the legs. And be sure you administer 
your medicines a little before the full of the moon, by no 
means in the wane of the moon; if you do, you will find 
them ineffectual. 

If barrenness proceed from the overflowing of the menstrua, 
then strengthen the womb as you were taught before; 
afterwards anoint the veins of the back with oil of roses, oil 
of myrtle and oil of quinces every night, and then wrap a 
piece of white baise about your veins, the cotton side next to 
the skin and keep the same always to it. But above all, I 
recommend this medicine to you. Take comfrey-leaves or 
roots, and clown woundwort, of each a handful; bruise them 

191 



The Works of Aristotle 

well, and boil them in ale, and drink a good draught of it 
now and then. Or take cinnamon, cassia lignea, opium, of 
each two drachms; myrrh, white pepper, galbanum, of each 
one drachm; dissolve the gum and opium in white wine; 
beat the rest into powder and make pills, mixing them together 
exactly, and let the patient take two each night going 
to bed; but let the pills not exceed fifteen grains. 

If barrenness proceed from a flux in the womb, the cure 
must be according to the cause producing it, or which the 
flux proceeds from, which may be known by signs; for a flux 
of the womb, being a continual distillation from it for a long 
time together, the colour of what is voided shows what 
humour it is that offends; in some it is red, and that proceeds 
from blood putrified, in some it is yellow, and that 
denotes choler; in others white and pale, and denotes phlegm. 
If pure blood comes out, as if a vein were opened, some corrosion 
or gnawing of the womb is to be feared. All these are 
known by the following signs: 

The place of conception is continually moist with the 
humours, the face ill-coloured, the party loathes meat and 
breathes with difficulty, the eyes are much swollen, which is 

sometimes without pain. If the offending humour be pure 
blood, then you must let blood in the arm, and the cephalic 
vein is fittest to draw back the blood; then let the juice of 
plantain and comfrey be injected into the womb. If phlegm 
be a cause, let cinnamon be a spice used in all her meats and 
drinks, and let her take a little Venice treacle or mithridate 
every morning. Let her boil burnet, mugwort, feverfew and 
vervain in all her broths. Also, half a drachm of myrrh, taken 
every morning, is an excellent remedy against this malady. If 
choler be the cause, let her take burrage, buglos, red roses, 
endive and succory roots, lettuce and white poppy-seed, of 
each a handful; boil these in white wine until one half be 
wasted; let her drink half a pint every morning to which half 
pint add syrup of chicory and syrup of peach-flowers, of each 
an ounce, with a little rhubarb, and this will gently purge 
her. If it proceed from putrified blood, let her be bled in the 
foot, and then strengthen the womb, as I have directed in 
stopping the menstrua. 

If barrenness be occasioned by the falling out of the womb, 
as sometimes it happens, let her apply sweet scents to the 
nose, such as civet, galbanum, storax, calamitis, wood of al


192 



The Works of Aristotle 

oes; and such other things as are of that nature; and let her 
lay stinking things to the womb, such as asafoetida, oil of 
amber, or the smoke of her own hair, being burnt; for this is 
a certain truth, that the womb flies from all stinking, and to 
all sweet things. But the most infallible cure in this case is; 
take a common burdock leaf (which you may keep dry, if 
you please, all the year), apply this to her head and it will 
draw the womb upwards. In fits of the mother, apply it to 
the soles of the feet, and it will draw the womb downwards. 
But seed beaten into a powder, draws the womb which way 
you please, accordingly as it is applied. 

If barrenness in the woman proceed from a hot cause, let 
her take whey and clarify it; then boil plantain leaves and 
roots in it, and drink it for her ordinary drink. Let her inject 
plantain juice into her womb with a syringe. If it be in the 
winter, when you cannot get the juice, make a strong decoction 
of the leaves and roots in water, and inject that up with 
a syringe, but let it be blood warm, and you will find this 
medicine of great efficacy. And further, to take away barrenness 
proceeding from hot causes, take of conserve of roses, 
cold lozenges, make a tragacanth, the confections of 

trincatelia; and use, to smell to, camphor, rosewater and 
saunders. It is also good to bleed the basilica or liver vein, 
and take four or five ounces of blood, and then take this 
purge; take electuarium de epithymo de succo rosarum, of 
each two drachms and a half; clarified whey, four ounces; 
mix them well together, and take it in the morning fasting; 
sleep after it about an hour and a half, and fast for four hours 
after; and about an hour before you eat anything, drink a 
good draught of whey. Also take lilywater, four ounces; 
mandragore water, one ounce; saffron, half a scruple; beat 
the saffron to a powder, and mix it with waters, drink them 
warm in the morning; use these eight days together. 

Some apparent Remedy against Barrenness and to cause 
Fruitfulness. 


Take broom flowers, smallage, parsley seed, cummin, 
mugwort, feverfew, of each half a scruple; aloes, half an ounce; 
Indian salt, saffron, of each half a drachm; beat and mix 
them together, and put it to five ounces of feverfew water 

193 



The Works of Aristotle 

warm; stop it up, and let it stand and dry in a warm place, 
and this do, two or three times, one after the other; then 
make each drachm into six pills, and take one of them every 
night before supper. 

For a purging medicine against barrenness, take conserve 
of benedicta lax, a quarter of an ounce; depsillo three drachms, 
electuary de rosarum, one drachm; mix them together with 
feverfew water, and drink it in the morning betimes. About 
three days after the patient hath taken this purge, let her be 
bled, taking four or five ounces from the median, or common 
black vein in the foot; and then give for five successive 
days, filed ivory, a drachm and a half, in feverfew water; and 
during the time let her sit in the following bath an hour 
together, morning and night. Take mild yellow sapes, daucas, 
balsam wood and fruit, ash-keys, of each two handfuls, red 
and white behen, broom flowers, of each a handful; musk, 
three grains; amber, saffron, of each a scruple; boiled in water 
sufficiently; but the musk, saffron, amber and broom flowers 
must be put into the decoction, after it is boiled and 
strained. 

A Confection very good against Barrenness. 

Take pistachia, eringoes, of each half an ounce; saffron, one 
drachm; lignum aloes, galengal, mace, coriophilla, balm flowers, 
red and white behen, of each four scruples; syrup of confected 
ginger, twelve ounces; white sugar, six ounces, decoct 
all these in twelve ounces of balm water, and stir them well 
together; then put in it musk and amber, of each a scruple; 
take thereof the quantity of a nutmeg three times a day; in 
the morning, an hour before noon and an hour after supper. 

But if the cause of barrenness, either in man or woman, be 
through scarcity or diminution of the natural seed, then such 
things are to be taken as do increase the seed, and incite to stir 
up to venery, and further conception; which I shall here set 
down, and then conclude the chapter concerning barrenness. 

For this, yellow rape seed baked in bread is very good; also 
young, fat flesh, not too much salted; also saffron, the tails 
of stincus, and long pepper prepared in wine. But let such 
persons eschew all sour, sharp, doughy and slimy meats, long 
sleep after meat, surfeiting and drunkenness, and so much 
as they can, keep themselves from sorrow, grief, vexation and 

194 



The Works of Aristotle 

anxious care. 

These things following increase the natural seed, stir up 
the venery and recover the seed again when it is lost, viz., 
eggs, milk, rice, boiled in milk, sparrows’ brains, flesh, bones 
and all; the stones and pizzles of bulls, bucks, rams and bears, 
also cocks’ stones, lambs’ stones, partridges’, quails’ and pheasants’ 
eggs. And this is an undeniable aphorism, that whatever 
any creature is addicted unto, they move or incite the 
man or the woman that eats them, to the like, and therefore 
partridges, quails, sparrows, etc., being extremely addicted 
to venery, they work the same effect on those men and women 
that eat them. Also, take notice, that in what part of the 
body the faculty that you would strengthen, lies, take that 
same part of the body of another creature, in whom the faculty 
is strong, as a medicine. As for instance, the procreative 
faculty lies in the testicles; therefore, cocks’ stones, lambs’ 
stones, etc., are proper to stir up venery. I will also give you 
another general rule; all creatures that are fruitful being eaten, 
make them fruitful that eat them, as crabs, lobsters, prawns, 
pigeons, etc. The stones of a fox, dried and beaten to a powder, 
and a drachm taken in the morning in sheep’s milk, and 

the stones of a boar taken in like manner, are very good. The 
heart of a male quail carried about a man, and the heart of a 
female quail carried about a woman, causes natural love and 
fruitfulness. Let them, also, that would increase their seed, 
eat and drink of the best, as much as they can; for sine Cerere 
el Libero, friget Venus, is an old proverb, which is, “without 
good meat and drink, Venus will be frozen to death.” 

Pottages are good to increase the seed; such as are made of 
beans, peas, and lupins, mixed with sugar. French beans, 
wheat sodden in broth, aniseed, also onions, stewed garlic, 
leeks, yellow rapes, fresh mugwort roots, eringo roots confected, 
ginger connected, etc. Of fruits, hazel nuts, cyprus 
nuts, pistachio, almonds and marchpanes thereof. Spices good 
to increase seed are cinnamon, galengal, long pepper, cloves, 
ginger, saffron and asafoetida, a drachm and a half taken in 
good wine, is very good for this purpose. 

The weakness and debility of a man’s yard, being a great 
hindrance to procreation let him use the following ointment 
to strengthen it: Take wax, oil of beaver-cod, marjoram, gentle 
and oil of costus, of each a like quantity, mix them into an 
ointment, and put it to a little musk, and with it anoint the 

195 



The Works of Aristotle 

yard, cods, etc. Take of house emmets, three drachms, oil of CHAPTER II 
white safannum, oil of lilies, of each an ounce; pound and 
bruise the ants, and put them to the oil and let them stand The Diseases of the Womb 
in the sun six days; then strain out the oil and add to it 
euphorbium one scruple, pepper and rue, of each one I HAVE ALREADY SAID, that the womb is the field of generadrachm, 
mustard seed half a drachm, set this altogether in tion; and if this field be corrupted, it is vain to expect any 
the sun two or three days, then anoint the instrument of fruit, although it be ever so well sown. It is, therefore, not 
generation therewith. without reason that I intend in this chapter to set down the 
several distempers to which the womb is obnoxious, with 
proper and safe remedies against them. 
SECTION I.—Of the Hot Distemper of the Womb. 
The distemper consists in excess of heat; for as heat of the 
womb is necessary for conception, so if it be too much, it 
nourisheth not the seed, but it disperseth its heat, and hinders 
the conception. This preternatural heat is sometimes 
from the birth, and causeth barrenness, but if it be accidental, 
it is from hot causes, that bring the heat and the blood to 
the womb; it arises also from internal and external medi


196 



The Works of Aristotle 

cines, and from too much hot meat, drink and exercise. Those 
that are troubled with this distemper have but few courses, 
and those are yellow, black, burnt or sharp, have hair betimes 
on their privities, are very prone to lust, subject to headache, 
and abound with choler, and when the distemper is strong 
upon them, they have but few terms, which are out of order, 
being bad and hard to flow, and in time they become hypochondriacal, 
and for the most part barren, having sometimes 
a phrenzy of the womb. 

Cure. The remedy is to use coolers, so that they offend not 
the vessels that most open for the flux of the terms. Therefore, 
take the following inwardly; succory, endive, violets, 
water lilies, sorrel, lettuce, saunders and syrups and conserve 
made thereof. Also take a conserve of succory, violets, water-
lilies, burrage, each an ounce; conserve of roses, half an ounce, 
diamargation frigid, diatriascantal, each half a drachm; and 
with syrup of violets, or juice of citrons, make an electuary. 
For outward applications, make use of ointment of roses, 
violets, water-lilies, gourd, Venus navel, applied to the back 
and loins. 

Let the air be cool, her garments thin, and her food en


dive, lettuce, succory and barley. Give her no hot meats, nor 
strong wine, unless mixed with water. Rest is good for her, 
but she must abstain from copulation, though she may sleep 
as long as she pleases. 

SECT. II.—Of the Cold Distempers of the Womb. 

This distemper is the reverse of the foregoing, and equally 
an enemy to generation, being caused by a cold quality 
abounding to excess, and proceeds from a too cold air, rest, 
idleness and cooling medicines. It may be known by an aversion 
to venery, and taking no pleasure in the act of copulation 
when the seed is spent; the terms are phlegmatic, thick 
and slimy, and do not flow as they should; the womb is windy 
and the seed crude and waterish. It is the cause of obstructions 
and barrenness, and is hard to be cured. 

Cure. Take galengal, cinnamon, nutmeg mace, cloves, ginger, 
cububs, cardamom, grains of paradise, each an ounce 
and a half, galengal, six drachms, long pepper, half an ounce, 
Zedoary five drachms; bruise them and add six quarts of 

197 



The Works of Aristotle 

wine, put them into a cellar nine days, daily stirring them; 
then add of mint two handfuls, and let them stand fourteen 
days, pour off the wine and bruise them, and then pour on 
the wine again, and distil them. Also anoint with oil of lilies, 
rue, angelica, cinnamon, cloves, mace and nutmeg. Let her 
diet and air be warm, her meat of easy concoction, seasoned 
with ant-seed, fennel and thyme; and let her avoid raw fruits 
and milk diets. 

SECT. III.—Of the Inflation of the Womb. 

The inflation of the womb is a stretching of it by wind, called 
by some a windy mole; the wind proceeds from a cold matter, 
whether thick or thin, contained in the veins of the womb, 
by which the heat thereof is overcome, and which either flows 
thither from other parts, or is gathered there by cold meats 
and drinks. Cold air may be a producing cause of it also, as 
women that lie in are exposed to it. The wind is contained 
either in the cavity of the vessels of the womb, or between 
the tumicle, and may be known by a swelling in the region 

of the womb, which sometimes reaches to the navel, loins 
and diaphragm, and rises and abates as the wind increaseth 
or decreaseth. It differs from the dropsy, in that it never swells 
so high. That neither physician nor midwife may take it for 
dropsy, let them observe the signs of the woman with the 
child laid down in a former part of this work; and if any sign 
be wanting, they may suspect it to be an inflation; of which 
it is a further sign, that in conception the swelling is invariable; 
also if you strike upon the belly, in an inflation, there 
will be noise, but not so in case there be a conception. It also 
differs from a mole, because in that there is a weight and 
hardness of the belly, and when the patient moves from one 
side to the other she feels a great weight which moveth, but 
not so in this. If the inflation continue without the cavity of 
the womb, the pain is greater and more extensive, nor is there 
any noise, because the wind is more pent up. 

Cure. This distemper is neither of a long continuance nor 
dangerous, if looked after in time; and if it be in the cavity of 
the womb it is more easily expelled. To which purpose give 
her diaphnicon, with a little castor and sharp clysters that 
expel the wind. If this distemper happen to a woman in tra


198 



The Works of Aristotle 

vail let her not purge after delivery, nor bleed, because it is 
from a cold matter; but if it come after child-bearing, and 
her terms come down sufficiently, and she has fullness of 
blood, let the saphoena vein be opened, after which, let her 
take the following electuary: take conserve of betony and 
rosemary, of each an ounce and a half; candied eringoes, citron 
peel candied, each half an ounce; diacimium, diagenel, 
each a drachm; oil of aniseed, six drops, and with syrup of 
citrons make an electuary. For outward application make a 
cataplasm of rue, mugwort, camomile, dill, calamint, new 
pennyroyal, thyme, with oil of rue, keir and camomile. And 
let the following clyster to expel the wind be put into the 
womb: Take agnus castus, cinnamon, each two drachms, boil 
them in wine to half a pint. She may likewise use sulphur, 
Bath and Spa waters, both inward and outward, because they 
expel the wind. 

SECT. IV.—Of the Straitness of the Womb and its Vessels. 

This is another effect of the womb, which is a very great 

obstruction to the bearing of children, hindering both the 
flow of the menses and conception, and is seated in the vessel 
of the womb, and the neck thereof. The causes of this 
straitness are thick and rough humours, that stop the mouths 
of the veins and arteries. These humours are bred either by 
gross or too much nourishment, when the heat of the womb 
is so weak that it cannot attenuate the humours, which by 
reason thereof, either flow from the whole body, or are gathered 
into the womb. Now the vessels are made straiter or 
closer several ways; sometimes by inflammation, scirrhous 
or other tumours; sometimes by compressions, scars, or by 
flesh or membranes that grow after a wound. The signs by 
which this is known are, the stoppage of the terms, not conceiving, 
and condities abounding in the body which are all 
shown by particular signs, for if there is a wound, or the 
secundine be pulled out by force phlegm comes from the 
wound; if stoppage of the terms be from an old obstruction 
of humours, it is hard to be cured; if it be only from the 
disorderly use of astringents, it is more curable; if it be from 
a scirrhous, or other tumours that compress or close the vessel, 
the disease is incurable. 

199 



The Works of Aristotle 

Cure. For the cure of that which is curable, obstructions 
must be taken away, phlegm must be purged, and she must 
be let blood, as will be hereafter directed in the stoppage of 
the terms. Then use the following medicines: Take of aniseed 
and fennel seed, each a drachm; rosemary, pennyroyal, 
calamint, betony flowers, each an ounce; castus, cinnamon, 
galengal, each half an ounce; saffron half a drachm, with 
wine. Or take asparagus roots, parsley roots, each an ounce; 
pennyroyal, calamint, each a handful; wallflowers, gilly-flowers, 
each two handfuls; boil, strain and add syrup of mugwort, 
an ounce and a half. For a fomentation, take pennyroyal, 
mercury, calamint, marjoram, mugwort, each two handfuls, 
sage, rosemary bays, camomile-flowers, each a handful, boil 
them in water and foment the groin and the bottom of the 
belly; or let her sit up to the navel in a bath, and then anoint 
about the groin with oil of rue, lilies, dill, etc. 

SECT. V.—Of the falling of the Womb. 

This is another evil effect of the womb which is both very 

troublesome, and also a hindrance to conception. Sometimes 
the womb falleth to the middle of the thighs, nay, almost to 
the knees, and may be known then by its hanging out. Now, 
that which causeth the womb to change its place is, that the 
ligaments by which it is bound to the other parts, are not in 
order; for there are four ligaments, two above, broad and 
membranous, round and hollow; it is also bound to the great 
vessels by veins and arteries, and to the back by nerves; but 
the place is changed when it is drawn another way, or when 
the ligaments are loose, and it falls down by its own weight. 
It is drawn on one side when the menses are hindered from 
flowing, and the veins and arteries are full, namely, those 
that go to the womb. If it be a mole on one side, the liver 
and spleen cause it; by the liver vein on the right side, and 
the spleen on the left, as they are more or less filled. Others 
are of opinion, it comes from the solution of the connexion 
of the fibrous neck and the parts adjacent; and that it is from 
the weight of the womb descending; this we deny not, but 
the ligaments must be loose or broken. But women with a 
dropsy could not be said to have the womb fallen down, if it 
came only from looseness; but in them it is caused by the 

200 



The Works of Aristotle 

saltness of the water, which dries more than it moistens. Now, 
if there be a little tumour, within or without the privities, it 
is nothing else but a descent of the womb, but if there be a 
tumour like a goose’s egg and a hole at the bottom and there 
is at first a great pain in the parts to which the womb is 
fastened, as the loins, the bottom of the belly, and the os 
sacrum, it proceeds from the breaking or stretching of the 
ligaments; and a little after the pain is abated, and there is an 
impediment in walking, and sometimes blood comes from 
the breach of the vessels, and the excrements and urine are 
stopped, and then a fever and convulsion ensueth, oftentimes 
proving mortal, especially if it happen to women with child. 

Cure. For the cure of this distemper, first put up the womb 
before the air alter it, or it be swollen or inflamed; and for 
this purpose give a clyster to remove the excrements, and lay 
her upon her back, with her legs abroad, and her thighs lifted 
up and her head down; then take the tumour in your hand 
and thrust it in without violence; if it be swelled by alteration 
and cold, foment it with the decoction of mallows, 
althoea, lime, fenugreek, camomile flowers, bay-berries, and 
anoint it with oil of lilies, and hen’s grease. If there be an 

inflammation, do not put it up, but fright it in, by putting a 
red-hot iron before it and making a show as if you intended 
to burn it; but first sprinkle upon it the powder of mastich, 
frankincense and the like; thus, take frankincense, mastich, 
each two drachms; sarcocol steeped in milk, drachm; 
mummy, pomegranate flowers, sanguisdraconis, each half a 
drachm. When it is put up, let her lie with her legs stretched, 
and one upon the other, for eight or ten days, and make a 
pessary in the form of a pear, with cork or sponge, and put it 
into the womb, dipped in sharp wine, or juice of acacia, with 
powder of sanguis, with galbanum and bdellium. Apply also 
a cupping-glass, with a great flame, under the navel or paps, 
or both kidneys, and lay this plaster to the back; take 
opopanax, two ounces, storax liquid, half an ounce; mastich, 
frankincense, pitch, bole, each two drachms; then with 
wax make a plaster; or take laudanum, a drachm and a half; 
mastich, and frankincense, each half a drachm, wood aloes, 
cloves, spike, each a drachm; ash-coloured ambergris, four 
grains: musk, half a scruple; make two round plasters to be 
laid on each side of the navel; make a fume of snails’ skins 
salted, or of garlic, and let it be taken in by the funnel. Use 

201 



The Works of Aristotle 

also astringent fomentations of bramble leaves, plantain, 
horse-tails, myrtles, each two handfuls; wormseed, two handfuls; 
pomegranate flowers, half an ounce; boil them in wine 
and water. For an injection take comfrey root, an ounce; 
rupturewort, two drachms; yarrow, mugwort, each half an 
ounce; boil them in red wine, and inject with a syringe. To 
strengthen the womb, take hartshorn, bays, of each half a 
drachm; myrrh half a drachm; make a powder of two doses, 
and give it with sharp wine. Or you may take Zedoary, parsnip 
seed, crabs’ eyes prepared, each a drachm, nutmeg, half a 
drachm; and give a drachm, in powder; but astringents must 
be used with great caution, lest by stopping the courses a 
worse mischief follow. To keep in its place, make rollers and 
ligatures as for a rupture; and put pessaries into the bottom 
of the womb, that may force it to remain. Let the diet be 
such as has drying, astringent and glueing qualities, as rice, 
starch, quinces, pears and green cheese; but let the summer 
fruits be avoided; and let her wine be astringent and red. 

CHAPTER III 


Of Diseases Relating to Women’s Monthly Courses 

SECTION I.—Of Women’s Monthly Courses in General. 

THAT DIVINE PROVIDENCE, which, with a wisdom peculiar to 
itself, has appointed woman to conceive by coition with man, 
and to bear and bring forth children, has provided for nourishment 
of children during their recess in the womb of their 
mother, by that redundancy of the blood which is natural to 
all women; and which, flowing out at certain periods of time 
(when they are not pregnant) are from thence called terms 
and menses, from their monthly flux of excrementitious and 
unprofitable blood. Now, that the matter flowing forth is 
excrementitious, is to be understood only with respect to the 
redundancy and overplus thereof, being an excrement only 
with respect to its quantity; for as to its quality, it is as pure 
and incorrupt as any blood in the veins; and this appears 
from the final cause of it, which is the propagation and con


202 



The Works of Aristotle 

servation of mankind, and also from the generation of it, 
being superfluity of the last aliment of the fleshy parts. If 
any ask, if the menses be not of hurtful quality, how can they 
cause such venomous effects; if they fall upon trees and herbs, 
they make the one barren and mortify the other: I answer, 
this malignity is contracted in the womb, for the woman, 
wanting native heat to digest the superfluity, sends it to the 
matrix, where seating itself till the mouth of the womb be 
dilated, it becomes corrupt and mortified; which may easily 
be, considering the heat and moistness of the place; and so 
this blood being out of its proper vessels, offends in quality. 

SECT. II.—Of the Terms coming out of order, either before 
or after the usual Time. 

Having, in the former part of this work, treated, of the suppression 
and overflowing of the monthly terms, I shall content 
myself with referring the reader thereto, and proceed to 
speak of their coming out of order, either before or after the 
usual time. 

Both these proceed from an ill constitution of body. Everything 
is beautiful in its order, in nature as well as in morality; 
and if the order of nature be broken, it shows the body 
to be out of order. Of each of these effects briefly. 

When the monthly courses come before their time, showing 
a depraved excretion, and flowing sometimes twice a 
month, the cause is in the blood, which stirs up the expulsive 
faculty of the womb, or else in the whole body, and is 
frequently occasioned by the person’s diet, which increases 
the blood too much, making it too sharp or too hot. If the 
retentive faculty of the womb be weak, and the expulsive 
faculty strong, and of a quick sense, it brings them forth the 
sooner. Sometimes they flow sooner by reason of a fall, stroke 
or some violent passion, which the parties themselves can 
best relate. If it be from heat, thin and sharp humours, it is 
known by the distemper of the whole body. The looseness of 
the vessels and the weakness of the retentive faculty, is known 
from a moist and loose habit of the body. It is more troublesome 
than dangerous, but hinders conception, and therefore 
the cure is necessary for all, but especially such as desire 
children. If it proceeds from a sharp blood, let her temper it 

203 



The Works of Aristotle 

by a good diet and medicines. To which purpose, let her use 
baths of iron water, that correct the distemper of the bowels, 
and then evacuate. If it proceeds from the retentive faculty, 
and looseness of the vessels, it is to be corrected with gentle 
astringents. 

As to the courses flowing after the usual time, the causes 
are, thickness of the blood, and the smallness of its quantity, 
with the stoutness of the passage, and weakness of the expulsive 
faculties. Either of these singly may stop the courses, 
but if they all concur, they render the distemper worse. If the 
blood abounds not in such a quantity as may stir up nature 
to expel it, its purging must necessarily be deferred, till there 
be enough. And if the blood be thick, the passage stopped, 
and the expulsive faculty weak, the menses must needs be 
out of order and the purging of them retarded. 

For the cure of this, if the quantity of blood be small, let 
her use a larger diet, and a very little exercise. If the blood be 
thick and foul, let it be made thin, and the humours mixed 
therewith, evacuated. It is good to purge, after the courses 
have done flowing, and to use calamint, and, indeed, the 
oftener she purges, the better. She may also use fumes and 

pessaries, apply cupping glasses without scarification to the 
inside of the thighs, and rub the legs and scarify the ankles, 
and hold the feet in warm water four or five days before the 
courses come down. Let her also anoint the bottom of her 
belly with things proper to provoke the terms. 

Remedies for Diseases in Women’s Paps 

Make a cataplasm of bean meal and salad oil, and lay it to 
the place afflicted. Or anoint with the juice of papilaris. This 
must be done when the papa are very sore. 

If the paps be hard and swollen, take a handful of rue, 
colewort roots, horehound and mint; if you cannot get all 
these conveniently, any two will do; pound the handful in 
honey, and apply it once every day till healed. 

If the nipples be stiff and sore, anoint twice a day with 
Florence oil, till healed. If the paps be flabby and hanging, 
bruise a little hemlock, and apply it to the breast for three 
days; but let it not stand above seven hours. Or, which is 
safer, rusae juice, well boiled, with a little sinapios added 

204 



The Works of Aristotle 

thereto, and anoint. 

If the paps be hard and dead, make a plate of lead pretty 
thin, to answer the breasts; let this stand nine hours each 
day, for three days. Or sassafras bruised, and used in like 
manner. 

Receipt for Procuring Milk 

Drink arpleui, drawn as tea, for twenty-one days. Or eat of 
aniseeds. Also the juice of arbor vitae, a glassful once a day 
for eleven days, is very good, for it quickens the memory, 
strengthens the body, and causeth milk to flow in abundance. 

Directions for Drawing of Blood 

Drawing of blood was first invented for good and salutary 
purposes, although often abused and misapplied. To bleed 
in the left arm removes long continued pains and headaches. 
It is also good for those who have got falls and bruises. 

Bleeding is good for many disorders, and generally proves 
a cure, except in some extraordinary cases, and in those cases 
bleeding is hurtful. If a woman be pregnant, to draw a little 
blood will give her ease, good health, and a lusty child. 

Bleeding is a most certain cure for no less than twenty-one 
disorders, without any outward or inward applications; and 
for many more with application of drugs, herbs and flowers. 

When the moon is on the increase, you may let blood at 
any time day or night; but when she is on the decline, you 
must bleed only in the morning. 

Bleeding may be performed from the month of March to 
November. No bleeding in December, January or February, 
unless an occasion require it. The months of March, April 
and November, are the three chief months of the year for 
bleeding in; but it may be performed with safety from the 
ninth of March to the nineteenth of November. 

To prevent the dangers that may arise from she unskilful 
drawing of blood, let none open a but a person of experience 
and practice. 

There are three sorts of people you must not let draw blood; 
first ignorant and inexperienced persons. Secondly, those who 

205 



The Works of Aristotle 

have bad sight and trembling hands, whether skilful or unskilled. 
For when the hand trembles, the lance is apt to start 
from the vein, and the flesh be thereby damaged, which may 
hurt, canker, and very much torment the patient. Thirdly, 
let no woman bleed, but such as have gone through a course 
of midwifery at college, for those who are unskilful may cut 
an artery, to the great damage of the patient. Besides, what is 
still worse, those pretended bleeders, who take it up at their 
own hand, generally keep unedged and rusty lancets, which 
prove hurtful, even in a skilful hand. Accordingly you ought 
to be cautious in choosing your physician; a man of learning 
knows what vein to open for each disorder; he knows how 
much blood to take as soon as he sees the patient, and he can 
give you suitable advice concerning your disorder. 

PART III 

ARISTOTLE’S BOOK OF PROBLEMS 

WITH OTHER ASTRONOMERS, ASTROLOGERS 
AND PHYSICIANS, CONCERNING 
THE STATE OF MAN’S BODY 


Q. Among all living creatures, why hath man only his countenance 
lifted up towards Heaven. A. 1. From the will of the 
Creator. But although this answer be true, yet it seemeth not 
to be of force, because that so all questions might be easily 
resolved. Therefore, 2. I answer that, for the most part, every 
workman doth make his first work worse, and then his second 
better! so God creating all other animals before man 
gave them their face looking down to the earth; and then 
secondly he created man, unto whom he gave an upright 
shape, lifted unto heaven, because it is drawn from divinity, 
and it is derived from the goodness of God, who maketh all 
his works both perfect and good. 3. Man only, among all 
living creatures, is ordained to the kingdom of heaven, and 
206 



The Works of Aristotle 

therefore hath his face elevated and lifted up to heaven, because 
that despising earthly and worldly things, he ought 
often to contemplate on heavenly things. 4. That the reasonable 
man is like unto angels, and finally ordained towards 
God; and therefore he hath a figure looking upward. 5. Man 
is a microcosm, that is, a little world, and therefore he doth 
command all other living creatures and they obey him. 6. 
Naturally there is unto everything and every work, that form 
and figure given which is fit and proper for its motion; as 
unto the heavens, roundness, to the fire a pyramidical form, 
that is, broad beneath and sharp towards the top, which form 
is most apt to ascend; and so man has his face towards heaven 
to behold the wonders of God’s works. 

Q. Why are the heads of men hairy? A. The hair is the ornament 
of the head, and the brain is purged of gross humours 
by the growing of the hair, from the highest to the lowest, 
which pass through the pores of the exterior flesh, become 
dry, and are converted into hair. This appears to be the case, 
from the circumstance that in all man’s body there is nothing 
drier than the hair, for it is drier than the bones; and it is 
well known that some beasts are nourished with bones, as 
dogs, but they cannot digest feathers or hair, but void them 
undigested, being too hot for nourishment. 2. It is answered, 
that the brain is purged in three different ways; of superfluous 
watery humours by the eyes, of choler by the nose, and 
of phlegm by the hair, which is the opinion of the best physicians. 


Q. Why have men longer hair on their heads than any other 
living creature? A. Arist. de Generat. Anim. says, that men 
have the moistest brain of all living creatures from which the 
seed proceedeth which is converted into the long hair of the 
head. 2. The humours of men are fat, and do not become 
dry easily; and therefore the hair groweth long on them. In 
beasts, the humours easily dry, and therefore the hair groweth 
not so long. 
Q. Why doth the hair take deeper root in man’s skin than in 
that of any other living creatures? A. Because it has greater 
store of nourishment in man, and therefore grows more in 
the inward parts of man. And this is the reason why in other 
207 



The Works of Aristotle 

creatures the hair doth alter and change with the skin, and 
not in man, unless by a scar or wound. 

Q. Why have women longer hair than men? A. Because 
women are moister and more phlegmatic than men, and 
therefore there is more matter for hair to them, and, by consequence, 
the length also of their hair. And, furthermore, 
this matter is more increased in women than men from their 
interior parts, and especially in the time of their monthly 
terms, because the matter doth then ascend, whereby the 
humour that breedeth the hair, doth increase. 2. Because 
women want beards; so the matter of the beard doth go into 
that of the hair. 
Q. Why have some women soft hair and some hard? A. 1. 
The hair hath proportion with the skin; of which some is 
hard, some thick, some subtle and soft, some gross; therefore, 
the hair which grows out of thick, gross skin, is thick 
and gross; that which groweth out of a subtle and fine skin, 
is fine and soft; when the pores are open, then cometh forth 
much humour, and therefore hard hair is engendered; and 
when the pores are strait, then there doth grow soft and fine 
hair. This doth evidently appear in men, because women 
have softer hair than they; for in women the pores are shut 
and strait, by reason of their coldness. 2. Because for the 
most part, choleric men have harder and thicker hair than 
others, by reason of their heat, and because their pores are 
always open, and therefore they have beards sooner than others. 
For this reason also, beasts that have hard hair are boldest, 
because such have proceeded from heat and choler, examples 
of which we have in the bear and the boar; and contrariwise, 
those beasts that have soft hair are fearful, because 
they are cold, as the hare and the hart. 3. From the climate 
where a man is born; because in hot regions hard and gross 
hair is engendered, as appears in the Ethiopians, and the 
contrary is the case is cold countries toward the north. 

Q. Why have some men curled hair, and some smooth? A. 
From the superior degree of heat in some men, which makes 
the hair curl and grow upward; this is proved by a man’s 
having smooth hair when he goes into a hot bath, and it 
afterwards becomes curled. Therefore keepers of baths have 
208 



The Works of Aristotle 

often curled hair, as also Ethiopians and choleric men. But 
the cause of this smoothness, is the abundance of moist 
humours. 

Q. Why do women show ripeness by hair in their privy parts, 
and not elsewhere, but men in their breasts? A. Because in 
men and women there is abundance of humidity in that place, 
but most in women, as men have the mouth of the bladder 
in that place, where the urine is contained, of which the hair 
in the breast is engendered, and especially that about the 
navel. But of women in general, it is said, that the humidity 
of the bladder of the matrix, or womb, is joined and meeteth 
in that lower secret place, and therefore is dissolved and separated 
in that place into vapours and fumes, which are the 
cause of hair. And the like doth happen in other places, as in 
the hair under the arms. 
Q. Why have not women beards? A. Because they want heat; 
which is the case with some effeminate men, who are beardless 
from the same cause, to have complexions like women. 
Q. Why doth the hair grow on those that are hanged? A. 
Because their bodies are exposed to the sun, which, by its 
heat doth dissolve all moisture into the fume or vapour of 
which the hair doth grow. 
Q. Why is the hair of the beard thicker and grosser than 
elsewhere; and the more men are shaven, the harder and 
thicker it groweth? A. Because by so much as the humours 
or vapours of a liquid are dissolved and taken away, so much 
the more doth the humour remaining draw to the same; and 
therefore the more the hair is shaven, the thicker the humours 
gather which engender the hair, and cause it to wax hard. 
Q. Why are women smooth and fairer than men? A. Because 
in women much of the humidity and superfluity, which 
are the matter and cause of the hair of the body, is expelled 
with their monthly terms; which superfluity, remaining in 
men, through vapours passes into hair. 
Q. Why doth man, above all other creatures, wax hoary and 
gray? A. Because man hath the hottest heart of all living crea209 



The Works of Aristotle 

tures; and therefore, nature being most wise, lest a man should 
be suffocated through the heat of his heart, hath placed the 
heart, which is most hot, under the brain, which is most 
cold; to the end that the heat of the heart may be tempered 
by the coldness of the brain; and contrariwise, that the coldness 
of the brain may be qualified by the heat of the heart; 
and thereby there might be a temperature in both. A proof 
of this is, that of all living creatures man hath the worst breath 
when he comes to full age. Furthermore, man doth consume 
nearly half his time in sleep, which doth proceed from the 
great excess of coldness and moisture in the brain, and from 
his wanting natural heat to digest and consume that moisture, 
which heat he hath in his youth, and therefore, in that 
age is not gray, but in old age, when heat faileth; because 
then the vapours ascending from the stomach remain undigested 
and unconsumed for want of natural heat, and thus 
putrefy, on which putrefaction of humours that the whiteness 
doth follow, which is called grayness or hoariness. 
Whereby it doth appear, that hoariness is nothing but a whiteness 
of hair, caused by a putrefaction of the humours about 
the roots of the hair, through the want of natural heat in old 

age. Sometimes all grayness is caused by the naughtiness of 
the complexion, which may happen in youth: sometimes 
through over great fear and care as appeareth in merchants, 
sailors and thieves. 

Q. Why doth red hair grow white sooner than hair of any 
other colour? A. Because redness is an infirmity of the hair; 
for it is engendered of a weak and infirm matter, that is, of 
matter corrupted with the flowers of the woman; and therefore 
it waxes white sooner than any other colour. 
Q. Why do wolves grow grisly? A. To understand this question, 
note the difference between grayness and grisliness; 
grayness is caused through defect of natural heat, but grisliness 
through devouring and heat. The wolf being a devouring 
beast, he eateth gluttonously without chewing, and enough 
at once for three days; in consequence of which, gross vapours 
engendered in the wolf’s body, which cause grisliness. Grayness 
and grisliness have this difference; grayness is only in 
the head, but grisliness all over the body. 
210 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why do horses grow grisly and gray? A. Because they are 
for the most part in the sun, and heat naturally causes putrefaction; 
therefore the matter of hair doth putrefy, and in consequence 
they are quickly peeled. 
Q. Why do men get bald, and trees let fall their leaves in 
winter? A. The want of moisture is the cause in both, which 
is proved by a man’s becoming bald through venery, because 
by that he lets forth his natural humidity and heat; and by 
that excess in carnal pleasure the moisture is consumed which 
is the nutriment of the hair. Thus, eunuchs and women do 
not grow bald, because they do not part from this moisture; 
and therefore eunuchs are of the complexion of women. 
Q. Why are not women bald? A. Because they are cold and 
moist, which are the causes that the hair remaineth; for moistness 
doth give nutriment to the hair, and coldness doth bind 
the pores. 
Q. Why are not blind men naturally bald? A. Because the 
eye hath moisture in it, and that moisture which should pass 
through by the substance of the eyes, doth become a sufficient 
nutriment for the hair and therefore they are seldom 
bald. 

Q. Why doth the hair stand on end when men are afraid? A. 
Because in time of fear the heat doth go from the outward 
parts of the body into the inward to help the heart, and so 
the pores in which the hair is fastened are shut up, after which 
stopping and shutting up of the pores, the standing up of 
the hair doth follow. 
Of the Head 

Q. Why is a man’s head round? A. Because it contains in it 
the moistest parts of the living creature: and also that the 
brain may be defended thereby, as with a shield. 
Q. Why is the head not absolutely long but somewhat round? 
A. To the end that the three creeks and cells of the brain 
might the better be distinguished; that is, the fancy in the 
211 



The Works of Aristotle 

forehead, the discoursing or reasonable part in the middle, 
and memory in the hinder-most part. 

Q. Why doth a man lift up his head towards the heavens 
when he doth imagine? A. Because the imagination is in the 
fore part of the head or brain, and therefore it lifteth up 
itself, that the creeks or cells of the imagination may be 
opened, and that the spirits which help the imagination, and 
are fit for that purpose, having their concourse thither, may 
help the imagination. 
Q. Why doth a man, when he museth or thinketh of things 
past, look towards the earth? A. Because the cell or creek 
which is behind, is the creek or chamber of the memory; 
and therefore, that looketh towards heaven when the head is 
bowed down, and so the cell is open, to the end that the 
spirits which perfect the memory should enter it. 
Q. Why is not the head fleshy, like other parts of the body? 
A. Because the head would be too heavy, and would not 
stand steadily. Also, a head loaded with flesh, betokens an 
evil complexion. 

Q. Why is the head subject to aches and griefs? A. By reason 
that evil humours, which proceed from the stomach, ascend 
up to the head and disturb the brain, and so cause pain in 
the head; sometimes it proceeds from overmuch filling the 
stomach, because two great sinews pass from the brain to the 
mouth of the stomach, and therefore these two parts do always 
suffer grief together. 
Q. Why have women the headache oftener than men? A. By 
reason of their monthly terms, which men are not troubled 
with, and by which a moist, unclean and venomous fume is 
produced, that seeks passage upwards, and so causes the headache. 
Q. Why is the brain white? A. 1. Because it is cold, and 
coldness is the mother of white. 2. Because it may receive 
the similitude and likeness of all colours, which the white 
colour can best do, because it is most simple. 
212 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why are all the senses in the head? A. Because the brain 
is there, on which all the senses depend, and are directed by 
it; and, consequently, it maketh all the spirits to feel, and 
governeth all the membranes. 
Q. Why cannot a person escape death if the brain or heart 
be hurt? A. Because the brain and heart are the two principal 
parts which concern life; and, therefore, if they be hurt, there 
is no remedy left for cure. 
Q. Why is the brain moist? A. Because it may easily receive 
an impression, which moisture can best do, as it appeareth 
in wax, which doth easily receive the print of the seal when 
soft. 
Q. Why is the brain cold? A. 1. Because that by this coldness 
it may clear the understanding of man and make it subtle. 2. 
That by the coldness of the brain, the heat of the heart may 
be tempered. 
Of the Eyes 

Q. Why have you one nose and two eyes? A. Because light is 
more necessary to us than smelling; and therefore it doth 
proceed from the goodness of Nature, that if we receive any 
hurt or loss of one eye, the other should remain. 
Q. Why have children great eyes in their youth, which become 
small as they grow up? A. It proceeds from the want of 
fire, and from the assemblage and meeting together of the 
light and humour; the eyes, being lightened by the sun, which 
doth lighten the easy humour thereof and purge them: and, 
in the absence of the sun, those humours become dark and 
black, and the sight not so good. 
Q. Why does the blueish grey eye see badly in the day-time 
and well in the night? A. Because greyness is light and shining 
in itself, and the spirits with which we see are weakened 
in the day-time and strengthened in the night. 
Q. Why are men’s eyes of diverse colours? A. By reason of 
213 



The Works of Aristotle 

diversity of humours. The eye hath four coverings and three 
humours. The first covering is called consolidative, which is 
the outermost, strong and fat. The second is called a horny 
skin or covering, of the likeness of a horn; which is a clear 
covering. The third, uvea, of the likeness of a black grape. 
The fourth is called a cobweb. The first humour is called 
albuginous, from its likeness unto the white of an egg. The 
second glarial; that is, clear, like unto crystalline. The third 
vitreous, that is, clear as glass. And the diversity of humours 
causeth the diversity of the eyes. 

Q. Why are men that have but one eye, good archers? and 
why do good archers commonly shut one? And why do such 
as behold the stars look through a trunk with one eye? A. 
This matter is handled in the perspective arts; and the reason 
is, as it doth appear in The Book of Causes, because that 
every virtue and strength united and knit together, is stronger 
than when dispersed and scattered. Therefore, all the force 
of seeing dispersed in two eyes, the one being shut, is gathered 
into the other, and so the light is fortified in him; and 
by consequence he doth see better and more certainly with 
one eye being shut, than when both are open. 

Q. Why do those that drink and laugh much, shed most 
tears? A. Because that while they drink and laugh without 
measure the air which is drawn in doth not pass out through 
the windpipe, and so with force is directed and sent to the 
eyes, and by their pores passing out, doth expel the humours 
of the eyes; which humour being expelled, brings tears. 
Q. Why do such as weep much, urine but little? A. Because 
the radical humidity of a tear and of urine are of one and the 
same nature, and, therefore, where weeping doth increase, 
urine diminishes. And that they are of one nature is plain to 
the taste, because they are both salt. 
Q. Why do some that have clear eyes see nothing? A. By 
reason of the oppilation and naughtiness of the sinews with 
which we see; for the temples being destroyed, the strength 
of the light cannot be carried from the brain to the eye. 
Q. Why is the eye clear and smooth like glass? A. 1. Because 
214 



The Works of Aristotle 

the things which may be seen are better beaten back from a 
smooth thing than otherwise, that thereby the sight should 
strengthen. 2. Because the eye is moist above all parts of the 
body, and of a waterish nature; and as the water is clear and 
smooth, so likewise is the eye. 

Q. Why do men and beasts who have their eyes deep in their 
head best see far off? A. Because the force and power by 
which we see is dispersed in them, and both go directly to 
the thing which is seen. Thus, when a man doth stand in a 
deep ditch or well, he doth see in the daytime the stars of the 
firmament; because then the power of the night and of the 
beams are not scattered. 
Q. Wherefore do those men who have eyes far out in their 
head not see far distant? A. Because the beams of the sight 
which pass from the eye, are scattered on every side, and go 
not directly unto the thing that is seen, and therefore the 
sight is weakened. 
Q. Why are so many beasts born blind, as lions’ whelps and 
dogs’ whelps. A. Because such beasts are not yet of perfect 
ripeness and maturity, and the course of nutriment doth not 
work in them. Thus the swallow, whose eyes, if they were 
taken out when they are young in their nest, would grow in 
again. And this is the case in many beasts who are brought 
forth before their time as it were dead, as bear’s whelps. 

Q. Why do the eyes of a woman that hath her flowers, stain 
new glass? And why doth a basilisk kill a man with his sight? 
A. When the flowers do run from a woman, then a most 
venomous air is distilled from them, which doth ascend into 
a woman’s head; and she, having pain in her head, doth wrap 
it up with a cloth or handkerchief; and because the eyes are 
full of insensible holes, which are called pores, there the air 
seeketh a passage, and infects the eyes, which are full of blood. 
The eyes also appear dropping and full of tears, by reason of 
the evil vapour that is in them; and these vapours are incorporated 
and multiplied till they come to the glass before them; 
and by reason that such a glass is round, clear and smooth, it 
doth easily receive that which is unclean. 2. The basilisk is a 
very venomous and infectious animal, and there pass from 
215 



The Works of Aristotle 

his eyes vapours which are multiplied upon the thing which 
is seen by him, and even unto the eye of man; the which 
venomous vapours or humours entering into the body, do 
infect him, and so in the end the man dieth. And this is also 
the reason why the basilisk, looking upon a shield perfectly 
well made with fast clammy pitch, or any hard smooth thing, 
doth kill itself, because the humours are beaten back from 
the hard smooth thing unto the basilisk, by which beating 
back he is killed. 

Q. Why is the sparkling in cats’ eyes and wolves’ eyes seen in 
the dark and not in the light? A. Because that the greater 
light doth darken the lesser; and therefore, in a greater light 
the sparkling cannot be seen; but the greater the darkness, 
the easier it is seen, and is more strong and shining. 
Q. Why is the sight recreated and refreshed by a green colour? 
A. Because green doth merely move the sight, and therefore 
doth comfort it; but this doth not, in black or white colours, 
because these colours do vehemently stir and alter the organ 
and instrument of the sight, and therefore make the greater 
violence; and by how much the more violent the thing is which 
is felt or seen the more it doth destroy and weaken the sense. 

Of the Nose 

Q. Why doth the nose stand out further than any other part 
of the body. A. 1. Because the nose is, as it were, the sink of 
the brain, by which the phlegm of the brain is purged; and 
therefore it doth stand forth, lest the other parts should be 
defiled. 2. Because the nose is the beauty of the face, and 
doth smell. 
Q. Why hath a man the worst smell of all creatures? A. Because 
man hath most brains of all creatures; and, therefore, 
by exceeding coldness and moisture, the brain wanteth a good 
disposition, and by consequence, the smelling instrument is 
not good, yea, some men have no smell. 
Q. Why have vultures and cormorants a keen smell? A. Because 
they have a very dry brain; and, therefore, the air car216 



The Works of Aristotle 

rying the smell, is not hindered by the humidity of the brain, 
but doth presently touch its instrument; and, therefore, vultures, 
tigers and other ravenous beasts, have been known to 
come five hundred miles after dead bodies. 

Q. Why did nature make the nostrils? A. 1. Because the 
mouth being shut we draw breath in by the nostrils, to refresh 
the heart. 2. Because the air which proceedeth from 
the mouth doth savour badly, because of the vapours which 
rise from the stomach, but that which we breathe from the 
nose is not noisome. 3. Because the phlegm which doth proceed 
from the brain is purged by them. 
Q. Why do men sneeze? A. That the expulsive virtue and 
power of the sight should thereby be purged, and the brain 
also from superfluities; because, as the lungs are purged by 
coughing, so is the sight and brain by sneezing; and therefore 
physicians give sneezing medicaments to purge the brain; 
and thus it is, such sick persons as cannot sneeze, die quickly, 
because it is a sign their brain is wholly stuffed with evil 
humours, which cannot be purged. 
Q. Why do such as are apoplectic sneeze, that is, such as are 
subject easily to bleed? A. Because the passages, or ventricles 
of the brain are stopped, and if they could sneeze, their apoplexy 
would be loosed. 
Q. Why does the heat of the sun provoke sneezing, and not 
the heat of the fire? A. Because the heat of the sun doth 
dissolve, but not consume, and therefore the vapour dissolved 
is expelled by sneezing; but the heat of the fire doth dissolve 
and consume, and therefore doth rather hinder sneezing than 
provoke it. 
Of the Ears 

Q. Why do beasts move their ears, and not men? A. Because 
there is a certain muscle near the under jaw which doth cause 
motion in the ear; and therefore, that muscle being extended 
and stretched, men do not move their ears, as it hath been 
seen in divers men; but all beasts do use that muscle or fleshy 
sinew, and therefore do move their ears. 
217 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why is rain prognosticated by the pricking up of asses’ 
ears? A. Because the ass is of a melancholic constitution, and 
the approach of rain produceth that effect on such a constitution. 
In the time of rain all beasts prick up their ears, but 
the ass before it comes. 
Q. Why have some animals no ears? A. Nature giveth unto 
everything that which is fit for it, but if she had given birds 
ears, their flying would have been hindered by them. Likewise 
fish want ears, because they would hinder their swimming, 
and have only certain little holes through which they hear. 
Q. Why have bats ears, although of the bird kind? A. Because 
they are partly birds in nature, in that they fly, by reason 
whereof they have wings; and partly they are hairy and 
seem to be of the nature of mice, therefore nature hath given 
them ears. 
Q. Why have men only round ears? A. Because the shape of 
the whole and of the parts should be proportionable, and 
especially in all things of one nature; for as a drop of water is 
round, so the whole water: and so, because a man’s head is 
round, the ears incline towards the same figure; but the heads 
of beasts are somewhat long, and so the ears are drawn into 
length likewise. 

Q. Why hath nature given all living creatures ears? A. 1. Because 
with them they should hear. 2. Because by the ear choleric 
superfluity is purged; for as the head is purged of phlegmatic 
superfluity by the nose, so from choleric, by the ears. 
Of the Mouth 

Q. Why hath the mouth lips to compass it? A. Because the 
lips cover and defend the teeth; for it would be unseemly if 
the teeth were always seen. Also, the teeth being of a cold 
nature, would be soon hurt if they were not covered with lips. 
Q. Why has a man two eyes and but one mouth? A. Because 
a man should speak but little, and hear and see much. And 
by hearing and the light we see difference of things. 
218 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why hath a man a mouth? A. 1. Because the mouth is 
the gate and door of the stomach. 2. Because the meat is 
chewed in the mouth, and prepared and made ready for the 
first digestion. 3. Because the air drawn into the hollow of 
the mouth for the refreshing of the heart, is made pure and 
subtle. 
Q. Why are the lips moveable? A. For the purpose of forming 
the voice and words which cannot be perfectly done without 
them. For as without a, b, c, there is no writing, so without 
the lips no voice can well be formed. 
Q. What causes men to yawn or gape? A. It proceeds from 
the thick fume and vapours that fill the jaws; by the expulsion 
of which is caused the stretching out and expansion of 
the jaws, and opening of the mouth. 
Q. Why doth a man gape when he seeth another do the 
same? A. It proceeds from the imagination. And this is proved 
by the similitude of the ass, who by reason of his melancholy, 
doth retain his superfluity for a long time, and would 
neither eat nor piss unless he should hear another doing the 
like. 

Of the Teeth 

Q. Why do the teeth only, amongst all ether bones, experience 
the sense of feeling? A. That they may discern heat and 
cold, that hurt them, which other bones need not. 
Q. Why have men more teeth than women? A. By reason of 
the abundance of heat and cold which is more in men than 
in women. 
Q. Why do the teeth grow to the end of our life, and not the 
other bones? A. Because otherwise they would be consumed 
with chewing and grinding. 
Q. Why do the teeth only come again when they fall, or be 
taken out, and other bones being taken away, grow no more? 
A. Because other bones are engendered of the humidity which 
219 



The Works of Aristotle 

is called radical, and so they breed in the womb of the mother, 
but the teeth are engendered of nutritive humidity, which is 
renewed and increased from day to day. 

Q. Why do the fore-teeth fall in youth, and grow again, and 
not the cheek teeth? A. From the defect of matter, and from 
the figure; because the fore-teeth are sharp, and the others 
broad. Also, it is the office of the fore-teeth to cut the meat, 
and therefore they are sharp; and the office of the others to 
chew the meat, and therefore they are broad in fashion, which 
is fittest for that purpose. 
Q. Why do the fore-teeth grow soonest? A. Because we want 
them sooner in cutting than the others in chewing. 
Q. Why do the teeth grow black in human creatures in their 
old age? A. It is occasioned by the corruption of the meat, 
and the corruption of phlegm with a choleric humour. 
Q. Why are colts’ teeth yellow, and of the colour of saffron, 
when they are young, and become white when they grow 
up? A. Because horses have abundance of watery humours 
in them, which in their youth are digested and converted 
into grossness; but in old age heat diminishes, and the watery 
humours remain, whose proper colour is white. 

Q. Why did nature give living creatures teeth? A. To some to 
fight with, and for defence of their lives, as unto wolves and 
bears, unto some to eat with, as unto horses, unto some for 
the forming of the voices, as unto men. 
Q. Why do horned beasts want their upper teeth? A. Horns 
and teeth are caused by the same matter, that is, nutrimental 
humidity, and therefore the matter which passeth into the 
horns turneth not into teeth, consequently they want the 
upper teeth. And such beasts cannot chew well; therefore, to 
supply the want of teeth, they have two stomachs, from 
whence it returns and they chew it again, then it goes into 
the other to be digested. 
Q. Why are some creatures brought forth with teeth, as kids 
and lambs; and some without, as men? A. Nature doth not 
220 



The Works of Aristotle 

want in necessary things, nor abound in things superfluous; 
and therefore, because these beasts, not long after they are 
fallen, do need teeth, they are fallen with teeth; but men, 
being nourished by their mother, for a long time do not stand 
in need of teeth. 

Of the Tongue 

Q. Why is the tongue full of pores? A. Because the tongue is 
the means whereby which we taste; and through the mouth, 
in the pores of the tongue, doth proceed the sense of tasting. 
Again, it is observed, that frothy spittle is sent into the mouth 
by the tongue from the lungs, moistening the meat and making 
it ready for digestion. 
Q. Why do the tongues of such as are sick of agues judge all 
things bitter? A. Because the stomachs of such persons are 
filled with choleric humours; and choler is very bitter, as 
appeareth by the gall; therefore this bitter fume doth infect 
their tongues; and so the tongue, being full of these tastes, 
doth judge everything bitter. 

Q. Why doth the tongue water when we hear sour and sharp 
things spoken of? A. Because the imaginative virtue or power 
is of greater force than the power or faculty of tasting; and 
when we imagine a taste, we conceive the power of tasting as 
a swan; there is nothing felt by the taste, but by means of the 
spittle the tongue doth water. 
Q. Why do some persons stammer and lisp? A. Sometimes 
through the moistness of the tongue and brain, as in children, 
who cannot speak plainly nor pronounce many letters. 
Sometimes it happeneth by reason of the shrinking of certain 
sinews which go to the tongue, which are corrupted 
with phlegm. 
Q. Why are the tongues of serpents and mad dogs venomous? 
A. Because of the malignity and tumosity of the venomous 
humour which predominates in them. 
Q. Why is a dog’s tongue good for medicine, and a horse’s 
221 



The Works of Aristotle 

tongue pestiferous? A. By reason of some secret property, or 
that the tongue of a dog is full of pores, and so doth draw and 
take away the viscosity of the wound. It is observed that a dog 
hath some humour in his tongue, with which, by licking he 
doth heal; but the contrary effect is the lick of a horse’s tongue. 

Q. Why is spittle white? A. By reason of the continual moving 
of the tongue, whereof heat is engendered, which doth 
make this superfluity white; as seen in the froth of water. 
Q. Why is spittle unsavoury and without taste? A. If it had a 
certain determinate taste, then the tongue would not taste at 
all, but only have the taste of spittle, and could not distinguish 
others. 
Q. Why doth the spittle of one that is fasting heal an 
imposthume? A. Because it is well digested and made subtle. 
Q. Why do some abound in spittle more than others? A. 
This doth proceed of a phlegmatic complexion, which doth 
predominate in them; and such are liable to a quotidian ague, 
which ariseth from the predominance of phlegm; the contrary 
in those that spit little, because heat abounds in them, 
which consumes the humidity of the spittle; and so the defect 
of spittle is a sign of fever. 

Q. Why is the spittle of a man that is fasting more subtle 
than of one that is full? A. Because the spittle is without the 
viscosity of meat, which is wont to make the spittle of one 
who is full, gross and thick. 
Q. From whence proceeds the spittle of a man? A. From the 
froth of the lungs, which according to the physicians, is the 
seat of the phlegm. 
Q. Why are beasts when going together for generation very 
full of froth and foam? A. Because then the lights and heart 
are in greater motion of lust; therefore there is engendered in 
them much frothy matter. 
Q. Why have not birds spittle? A. Because they have very 
dry lungs. 
222 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why doth the tongue sometimes lose the use of speaking? 
A. It is occasioned by a palsy or apoplexy, which is a 
sudden effusion of blood, and by gross humours; and sometimes 
also by infection of spiritus animates in the middle cell 
of the brain which hinders the spirits from being carried to 
the tongue. 
Of the Roof of the Mouth 

Q. Why are fruits, before they are ripe, of a bitter and sour 
relish, and afterward sweet? A. A sour relish or taste proceeds 
from coldness and want of heat in gross and thick humidity; 
but a sweet taste is produced by sufficient heat; therefore in 
the ripe fruit humidity is subtle through the heat of the sun, 
and such fruit is commonly sweet; but before it is ripe, as 
humidity is gross or subtle for want of heat, the fruit is bitter 
or sour. 
Q. Why are we better delighted with sweet tastes than with 
bitter or any other? A. Because a sweet thing is hot and moist, 
and through its heat dissolves and consumes superfluous 
humidities, and by this humidity immundicity is washed 
away; but a sharp, eager taste, by reason of the cold which 
predominates in it, doth bind overmuch, and prick and offend 
the parts of the body in purging, and therefore we do 
not delight in that taste. 

Q. Why doth a sharp taste, as that of vinegar, provoke appetite 
rather than any other? A. Because it is cold, and doth 
cool. For it is the nature of cold to desire to draw, and therefore 
it is the cause of appetite. 
Q. Why do we draw in more air than we breathe out? A. 
Because much air is drawn in that is converted into nutriment, 
and with the vital spirits is contained in the lungs. 
Therefore a beast is not suffocated as long as it receives air 
with its lungs, in which some part of the air remaineth also. 
Q. Why doth the air seem to be expelled and put forth, seeing 
the air is invisible, by reason of its variety and thinness? 
A. Because the air which is received in us, is mingled with 
223 



The Works of Aristotle 

vapours and fumes from the heart, by reason whereof it is 
made thick, and so is seen. And this is proved by experience, 
because that in winter, we see our breath, for the coldness of 
the air doth bind the air mixed with fume, and so it is thickened 
and made gross, and by consequence is seen. 

Q. Why have some persons stinking breath? A. Because of 
the evil fumes that arise from the stomach. And sometimes 
it doth proceed from the corruption of the airy parts of the 
body, as the lungs. The breath of lepers is so infected that it 
would poison birds if near them, because the inward parts 
are very corrupt. 
Q. Why are lepers hoarse? A. Because the vocal instruments 
are corrupted, that is, the lights. 
Q. Why do persons become hoarse? A. Because of the rheum 
descending from the brain, filling the conduit of the lights; 
and sometimes through imposthumes of the throat, or rheum 
gathering in the neck. 
Q. Why have the females of all living creatures the shrillest 
voices, the crow only excepted, and a woman a shriller and 
smaller voice than a man? A. By reason of the composition 
of the veins and vocal arteries the voice is formed, as appears 
by this similitude, that a small pipe sounds shriller than a 
great. Also in women, because the passage where the voice is 
formed is made narrow and strait, by reason of cold, it being 
the nature of cold to bind; but in men, the passage is open 
and wider through heat, because it is the property of heat to 
open and dissolve. It proceedeth in women through the 
moistness of the lungs, and weakness of the heat. Young and 
diseased men have sharp and shrill voices from the same cause. 
Q. Why doth the voice change in men at fourteen, and in 
women at twelve; in men they begin to yield seed, in women 
when their breasts begin to grow? A. Because then the beginning 
of the voice is slackened and loosened; and this is proved 
by the similitude of the string of an instrument let down or 
loosened, which gives a great sound, and also because creatures 
that are gelded, as eunuchs, capons., etc., have softer and 
slenderer voices than others, by the want of their stones. 
224 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why do small birds sing more and louder than great ones, 
as appears in the lark and nightingale? A. Because the spirits 
of small birds are subtle and soft, and the organ conduit 
strait, as appeareth in a pipe; therefore their notes following 
easily at desire, they sing very soft. 
Q. Why do bees, wasps, locusts and many other such like 
insects, make a noise, seeing they have no lungs, nor instruments 
of music? A. Because in them there is a certain small 
skin, which, when struck by the air, causeth a sound. 
Q. Why do not fish make a sound? A. Because they have no 
lungs, but only gills, nor yet a heart, and therefore they need 
not the drawing in of the air, and by consequence they make 
no noise, because a voice is a percussion of the air which is 
drawing. 
Of the Neck 

Q. Why hath a living creature a neck? A. Because the neck is 
the supporter of the head, and therefore the neck is in the 
middle between the head and the body, to the intent that by 
it, and by its sinews, motion and sense of the body might be 
conveyed through all the body; and that by means of the 
neck, the heart, which is very hot, might be separated from 
the brain. 
Q. Why do some creatures want necks, as serpents and fishes? 
A. Because they want hearts, and therefore want that assistance 
which we have spoken of; or else they have a neck in 
some inward part of them, which is not distinguished outwardly. 
Q. Why is the neck full of bones and joints? A. That it may 
bear and sustain the head the better. Also, because the back 
bone is joined to the brain in the neck, and from thence it 
receives marrow, which is of the substance of the brain. 
225 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why have some creatures long necks, as cranes, storks 
and such like? A. Because such birds seek their food at the 
bottom of waters. And some creatures have short necks, as 
sparrows, hawks, etc., because such are ravenous, and therefore 
for strength have short necks, as appeareth in the ox, 
who has a short neck and strong. 
Q. Why is the neck hollow, and especially before, about the 
tongue? A. Because there are two passages, whereof the one 
doth carry the meat to the nutritive instrument, or stomach 
and liver, which is called by the Greeks _Aesophagus_; and 
the other is the windpipe. 
Q. Why is the artery made with rings and circle? A. The 
better to bow and give a good sounding. 
Of the Shoulders and Arms 

Q. Why hath a man shoulders and arms? A. To lift and carry 
burdens. 
Q. Why are the arms round? A. For the swifter and speedier 
work. 
Q. Why are the arms thick? A. That they may be strong to 
lift and bear burdens, and thrust and give a strong blow; so 
their bones are thick, because they contain much marrow, or 
they would be easily corrupted and injured. 
Q. Why do the arms become small and slender in some diseases, 
as in mad men, and such as are sick of the dropsy? A. 
Because all the parts of the body do suffer the one with the 
other; and therefore one member being in grief, all the 
humours do concur and run thicker to give succour and help 
to the aforesaid grief. 
Q. Why have brute beasts no arms? A. Their fore feet are 
instead of arms, and in their place. 
226 



The Works of Aristotle 

Of the Hands 

Q. For what use hath a man hands, and an ape also, like 
unto a man? A. The hand is an instrument a man doth especially 
make use of, because many things are done by the hands, 
and not by any other part. 
Q. Why are some men ambo-dexter, that is, they use the left 
hand as the right? A. By reason of the great heat of the heart, 
and for the hot bowing of the same, for it is that which makes 
a man as nimble of the left hand as of the right. 
Q. Why are the fingers full of joints? A. To be more fit and 
apt to receive and keep what is put in them. 
Q. Why hath every finger three joints, and the thumb but 
two? A. The thumb hath three, but the third is joined to the 
arm, therefore is stronger than the other fingers; and is called 
pollex or polico, that is, to excel in strength. 
Q. Why are the fingers of the right hand nimbler than the 
fingers of the left? A. It proceedeth from the heat that predominates 
in those parts, and causeth great agility. 

Of the Nails 

Q. From whence do nails proceed? A. Of the tumosity and 
humours, which are resolved and go into the extremities of 
the fingers; and they are dried through the power of the external 
air, and brought to the hardness of horn. 
Q. Why do the nails of old men grow black and pale? A. 
Because the heat of the heart decaying causeth their beauty 
to decay also. 
Q. Why are men judged to be good or evil complexioned by 
the colour of the nails? A. Because they give witness of the 
goodness or badness of their heart, and therefore of the complexion, 
for if they be somewhat red, they betoken choler 
well tempered; but if they be yellowish or black, they signify 
melancholy. 
227 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why do white spots appear in the nails? A. Through mixture 
of phlegm with nutriment. 
Of the Paps and Dugs 

Q. Why are the paps placed upon the breasts? A. Because 
the breast is the seat of the heart, which is most hot; and 
therefore the paps grow there, to the end that the menses 
being conveyed thither as being near the heat of the heart, 
should the sooner be digested, perfected and converted with 
the matter and substance of the milk. 
Q. Why are the paps below the breasts in beasts, and above 
the breast in women? A. Because woman goes upright, and 
has two legs only; and therefore if her paps were below her 
breasts, they would hinder her going; but beasts having four 
feet prevents that inconveniency. 
Q. Whether are great, small or middle-sized paps best for 
children to suck? A. In great ones the heat is dispersed, there 
is no good digestion of the milk; but in small ones the power 
and force is strong, because a virtue united is strongest; and 
by consequence there is a good digestion for the milk. 

Q. Why have not men as great paps and breasts as women? 
A. Because men have not monthly terms, and therefore have 
no vessel deputed for them. 
Q. Why do the paps of young women begin to grow about 
thirteen or fifteen years of age? A. Because then the flowers 
have no course to the teats, by which the young one is nourished, 
but follow their ordinary course and therefore wax soft. 
Q. Why hath a woman who is with child of a boy, the right 
pap harder than the left? A. Because the male child is conceived 
in the right side of the mother; and therefore the flowers 
do run to the right pap, and make it hard. 
Q. Why doth it show weakness of the child, when the milk 
doth drop out of the paps before the woman is delivered? A. 
Because the milk is the proper nutriment of the child in the 
228 



The Works of Aristotle 

womb of its mother, therefore if the milk run out, it is a 
token that the child is not nourished, and consequently is 
weak. 

Q. Why do the hardness of the paps betoken the health of 
the child in the womb? A. Because the flowers are converted 
into milk, and thereby strength is signified. 
Q. Why are women’s paps hard when they be with child, 
and soft at other times? A. Because they swell then, and are 
puffed, and the great moisture which proceeds from the flowers 
doth run into the paps, which at other seasons remaineth 
in the matrix and womb, and is expelled by the place deputed 
for that end. 
Q. By what means doth the milk of the paps come to the 
matrix or womb? A. There is a certain knitting and coupling 
of the paps with the womb, and there are certain veins which 
the midwives do cut in the time of the birth of the child, and 
by those veins the milk flows in at the navel of the child, and 
so it receives nourishment by the navel. 
Q. Why is it a sign of a male child in the womb when the 
milk that runneth out of a woman’s breast is thick, and not 
much, and of a female when it is thin? A. Because a woman 
that goeth with a boy hath a great heat in her, which doth 
perfect the milk and make it thick; but she who goes with a 
girl hath not so much heat, and therefore the milk is undigested, 
imperfect, watery and thin, and will swim above the 
water if it be put into it. 
Q. Why is the milk white, seeing the flowers are red, of which 
it is engendered? A. Because blood which is well purged and 
concocted becomes white, as appeareth in flesh whose proper 
colour is white, and being boiled, is white. Also, because 
every humour which is engendered of the body, is made like 
unto that part in colour where it is engendered as near as it 
can be; but because the flesh of the paps is white, therefore 
the colour of the milk is white. 
Q. Why doth a cow give milk more abundantly than other 
beasts? A. Because she is a great eating beast, where there is 
much monthly superfluity engendered, there is much milk; 
229 



The Works of Aristotle 

because it is nothing else but the blood purged and tried. 

Q. Why is not milk wholesome? A. 1. Because it curdeth in 
the stomach, whereof an evil breath is bred. 2. Because the 
milk doth grow sour in the stomach, where evil humours are 
bred, and infect the breath. 
Q. Why is milk bad for such as have the headache? A. Because 
it is easily turned into great fumosities, and hath much 
terrestrial substance in it, the which ascending, doth cause 
the headache. 
Q. Why is milk fit nutriment for infants? A. Because it is a 
natural and usual food, and they were nourished by the same 
in the womb. 
Q. Why are the white-meats made of a newly milked cow 
good? A. Because milk at that time is very springy, expels 
fumosities, and, as it were, purges at that time. 
Q. Why is the milk naught for the child, if the woman giving 
suck uses carnal copulation? A. Because in time of carnal 
copulation, the best part of the milk goes to the seed vessels, 
and to the womb, and the worst remain in the paps, which 
hurts the child. 

Q. Why do physicians forbid the eating of fish and milk at 
the same time? A. Because they produce a leprosy, and because 
they are phlegmatic. 
Q. Why have not birds and fish milk and paps? A. Because 
paps would hinder the flight of birds. And although fish have 
neither paps nor milk, the females cast much spawn, which 
the male touches with a small gut, and causes their kind to 
continue in succession. 
Of the Back 

Q. Why have beasts a back? A. 1. Because the back is the 
way and mien of the body from which are extended and 
spread throughout, all the sinews of the backbone. 2. Be230 



The Works of Aristotle 

cause it should be a guard and defence for the soft parts of 
the body, as for the stomach, liver, lights and such like. 3. 
Because it is the foundation of all the bones, as the ribs, 
fastened to the back bone. 

Q. Why hath the back bone so many joints or knots, called 
spondyli? A. Because the moving and bending it, without such 
joints, could not be done; and therefore they are wrong who 
say that elephants have no such joints, for without them they 
could not move. 
Q. Why do fish die after their back bones are broken? A. 
Because in fish the back bone is instead of the heart; now the 
heart is the first thing that lives and the last that dies; and 
when that bone is broken, fish can live no longer. 
Q. Why doth a man die soon after the marrow is hurt or 
perished? A. Because the marrow proceeds from the brain, 
which is the principal part of a man. 
Q. Why have some men the piles? A. Those men are cold 
and melancholy, which melancholy first passes to the spleen, 
its proper seat, but there cannot be retained, for the 
abundancy of blood; for which reason it is conveyed to the 
back bone, where there are certain veins which terminate in 
the back, and receive the blood. When those veins are full of 
the melancholy blood, then the conduits of nature are opened, 
and the blood issues out once a month, like women’s terms. 
Those men who have this course of blood, are kept from 
many infirmities, such as dropsy, plague, etc. 

Q. Why are the Jews much subject to this disease? A. Because 
they eat much phlegmatic and cold meats, which breed 
melancholy blood, which is purged with the flux. Another 
reason is, motion causes heat and heat digestion; but strict 
Jews neither move, labour nor converse much, which breeds 
a coldness in them, and hinders digestion, causing melancholic 
blood, which is by this means purged out. 
231 



The Works of Aristotle 

Of the Heart 

Q. Why are the lungs light, spongy and full of holes? A. 
That the air may be received into them for cooling the heart, 
and expelling humours, because the lungs are the fan of the 
heart; and as a pair of bellows is raised up by taking in the 
air, and shrunk by blowing it out, so likewise the lungs draw 
the air to cool the heart, and cast it out, lest through too 
much air drawn in, the heart should be suffocated. 
Q. Why is the flesh of the lungs white? A. Because they are 
in continual motion. 
Q. Why have those beasts only lungs that have hearts? A. 
Because the lungs be no part for themselves, but for the heart, 
and therefore, it were superfluous for those creatures to have 
lungs that have no hearts. 
Q. Why do such creatures as have no lungs want a bladder? 
A. Because such drink no water to make their meat digest 
and need no bladder for urine; as appears in such birds as do 
not drink at all, viz., the falcon and sparrow hawk. 

Q. Why is the heart in the midst of the body? A. That it may 
import life to all, parts of the body, and therefore it is compared 
to the sun, which is placed in the midst of the planets, 
to give light to them all. 
Q. Why only in men is the heart on the left side? A. To the 
end that the heat of the heart may mitigate the coldness of 
the spleen; for the spleen is the seat of melancholy, which is 
on the left side also. 
Q. Why is the heart first engendered; for the heart doth live 
first and die last? A. Because the heart is the beginning and 
original of life, and without it no part can live. For of the 
seed retained in the matrix, there is first engendered a little 
small skin, which compasses the seed; whereof first the heart 
is made of the purest blood; then of blood not so pure, the 
liver; and of thick and cold blood the marrow and brain. 
Q. Why are beasts bold that have little hearts? A. Because in 
232 



The Works of Aristotle 

a little heart the heat is well united and vehement, and the 
blood touching it, doth quickly heat it and is speedily carried 
to the other parts of the body, which give courage and 
boldness. 

Q. Why are creatures with a large heart timorous, as the hare? 
A. The heart is dispersed in such a one, and not able to heat 
the blood which cometh to it; by which means fear is bred. 
Q. How is it that the heart is continually moving? A. Because 
in it there is a certain spirit which is more subtle than 
air, and by reason of its thickness and rarefaction, seeks a 
larger space, filling the hollow room of the heart; hence the 
dilating and opening of the heart, and because the heart is 
earthly the thrusting and moving ceasing, its parts are at rest, 
tending downwards. As a proof of this, take an acorn, which, 
if put into the fire, the heat doth dissolve its humidity, therefore 
occupies a greater space, so that the rind cannot contain 
it, but puffs up, and throws it into the fire. The like of the 
heart. Therefore the heart of a living creature is triangular, 
having its least part towards its left side, and the greater towards 
the right; and doth also open and shut in the least 
part, by which means it is in continual motion; the first 
motion is called diastole, that is extending the heart or breast; 
the other systole, that is, shutting of the heart; and from these 
all the motions of the body proceed, and that of the pulse 
which the physicians feel. 

Q. How comes it that the flesh of the heart is so compact 
and knit together? A. Because in thick compacted substances 
heat is commonly received and united. And because the heart 
with its heat should moderate the coldness of the brain, it is 
made of that fat flesh apt to keep a strong heat. 
Q. How comes the heart to be the hottest part of all living 
creatures? A. It is so compacted as to receive the heat best, 
and because it should mitigate the coldness of the brain. 
Q. Why is the heart the beginning of life? A. It is plain that 
in it the vital spirit is bred, which is the heat of life; and 
therefore the heart having two receptacles, viz., the right and 
the left the right hath more blood than spirits; which spirit is 
233 



The Works of Aristotle 

engendered to give life and vivify the body. 

Q. Why is the heart long and sharp like a pyramid? A. The 
round figure hath an angle, therefore the heart is round, for 
fear any poison or hurtful matter should be retained in it; 
and because that figure is fittest for motion. 
Q. How comes the blood chiefly to be in the heart? A. The 
blood in the heart has its proper or efficient place, which 
some attribute to the liver; and therefore the heart doth not 
receive blood from any other parts but all other parts of it. 
Q. How happens it that some creatures want a heart? A. 
Although they have no heart, yet they have somewhat that 
answers for it, as appears in eels and fish that have the back 
bone instead of the heart. 
Q. Why does the heart beat in some creatures after the head 
is cut off, as in birds and hens? A. Because the heart lives first 
and dies last, and therefore beats longer than other parts. 
Q. Why doth the heat of the heart sometimes fail of a sudden, 
and in those who have the falling sickness? A. This proceeds 
from the defect of the heart itself, and of certain small 
skins with which it is covered, which, being infected and 
corrupted, the heart faileth on a sudden; sometimes only by 
reason of the parts adjoining; and therefore, when any venomous 
humour goes out of the stomach that turns the heart 
and parts adjoining, that causeth this fainting. 
Of the Stomach 

Q. For what reason is the stomach large and wide? A. Because 
in it the food is first concocted or digested as it were in 
a pot, to the end that which is pure should be separated from 
that which is not; and therefore, according to the quantity 
of food, the stomach is enlarged. 
Q. How comes it that the stomach is round? A. Because if it 
had angles and corners, food would remain in them and breed 
ill-humours, so that a man would never want agues, which 
234 



The Works of Aristotle 

humours are evacuated and consumed, and not hid in any 
such corners, by the roundness of the stomach. 

Q. How comes the stomach to be full of sinews? A. Because 
the sinews can be extended and enlarged, and so is the stomach 
when it is full; but when empty it is drawn together, and 
therefore nature provides the sinews. 
Q. How comes the stomach to digest? A. Because of the heat 
which is in it, and comes from the parts adjoining, that is, 
the liver and the heart. For as we see in metals the heat of the 
fire takes away the rust and dross from iron, the silver from 
tin, and gold from copper; so also by digestion the pure is 
separated from the impure. 
Q. For what reason doth the stomach join the liver? A. Because 
the liver is very hot, and with its heat helps digestion, 
and provokes appetite. 
Q. Why are we commonly cold after dinner? A. Because 
then the heat goes to the stomach to further digestion, and 
so the other parts grow cold. 

Q. Why is it hurtful to study soon after dinner? A. Because 
when the heat labours to help the imagination in study, it 
ceases from digesting the food, which remains undigested; 
therefore people should walk sometimes after meals. 
Q. How cometh the stomach slowly to digest meat? A. Because 
it swims in the stomach. Now, the best digestion is in 
the bottom of the stomach, because the fat descends not 
there; such as eat fat meat are very sleepy by reason that digestion 
is hindered. 
Q. Why is all the body wrong when the stomach is uneasy? 
A. Because the stomach is knit with the brain, heart and 
liver, which are the principal parts in man; and when it is 
not well, the others are indisposed. Again, if the first digestion 
be hindered, the others are also hindered; for in the first 
digestion is the beginning of the infirmity in the stomach. 
Q. Why are young men sooner hungry than old men? A. 
235 



The Works of Aristotle 

Young men do digest for three causes; 1. For growing; 2. For 
restoring life; and 3. For conservation of life. Also, young 
men are hot and dry, and therefore the heat doth digest more, 
and by consequence they desire more. 

Q. Why do physicians prescribe that men should eat when 
they have an appetite? A. Because much hunger and emptiness 
will fill the stomach with naughty rotten humours, which 
are drawn in instead of meat; for, if we fast over night we 
have an appetite to meat, but none in the morning; as then 
the stomach is filled with naughty humours, and especially 
its mouth, which is no true filling, but a deceitful one. And, 
therefore, after we have eaten a little, our stomach comes to 
us again; for the first morsel, having made clean the mouth 
of the stomach, doth provoke the appetite. 
Q. Why do physicians prescribe that we should not eat too 
much at a time, but little by little? A. Because when the stomach 
is full, the meat doth swim in it, which is a dangerous 
thing. Another reason is, that as very green wood doth put 
out the fire, so much meat chokes the natural heat and puts 
it out; and therefore the best physic is to use temperance in 
eating and drinking. 

Q. Why do we desire change of meals according to the change 
of times; as in winter, beef, mutton; in summer light meats, 
as veal, lamb, etc.? A. Because the complexion of the body is 
altered and changed according to the time of year. Another 
reason is, that this proceeds from the quality of the season: 
because the cold in winter doth cause a better digestion. 
Q. Why should not the meat we eat be as hot as pepper and 
ginger? A. Because as hot meat doth inflame the blood, and 
dispose it to a leprosy, so, on the contrary, meat too cold 
doth mortify and chill the blood. Our meat should not be 
over sharp, because it wastes the constitution; too much sauce 
doth burn the entrails, and inclineth to too often drinking; 
raw meat doth the same; and over sweet meats to constipate 
and cling the veins together. 
Q. Why is it a good custom to eat cheese after dinner, and 
pears after all meat? A. Because, by reason of its earthliness 
236 



The Works of Aristotle 

and thickness it tendeth down towards the bottom of the 
stomach, and so put down the meat; and the like of pears. 
Note, that new cheese is better than old, and that old soft 
cheese is very bad, and causeth the headache and stopping 
of the liver; and the older the worse. Whereof it is said that 
cheese digesteth all things but itself. 

Q. Why are nuts good after cheese, as the proverb is, “After 
fish nuts, and after flesh cheese?” A. Because fish is of hard 
digestion, and doth easily putrefy and corrupt; and nuts are 
a remedy against poison. 
Q. Why is it unwholesome to wait long for one dish after 
another, and to eat of divers kinds of meat? A. Because the 
first begins to digest when the last is eaten, and so digestion 
is not equally made. But yet this rule is to be noted; dishes 
light of digestion, as chickens, kids, veal, soft eggs and such 
like, should be first eaten; because, if they should be first 
served and eaten and were digested, they would hinder the 
digestion of the others; and the light meats not digested would 
be corrupted in the stomach and kept in the stomach violently, 
whereof would follow belching, loathing, headache, 
bellyache and great thirst. It is very hurtful too, at the same 
meal to drink wine and milk, because they are productive of 
leprosy. 

Q. Whether is meat or drink best for the stomach? A. Drink 
is sooner digested than meat, because meat is of greater substance, 
and more material than drink, and therefore meat is 
harder to digest. 
Q. Why is it good to drink after dinner? A. Because the drink 
will make the meat readier to digest. The stomach is like 
unto a pot which doth boil meat, and therefore physicians 
do counsel to drink at meals. 
Q. Why is it good to forbear a late supper? A. Because there 
is little moving or stirring after supper, and so the meat is 
not sent down to the bottom of the stomach, but remaineth 
undigested, and so breeds hurts; therefore a light supper is 
best. 
237 



The Works of Aristotle 

Of the Blood Of the Urine 

Q. Why is it necessary that every living creature that hath 
blood have also a liver? A. Because the blood is first made in 
the liver, its seat, being drawn from the stomach by certain 
principal veins, and so engendered. 
Q. Why is the blood red? A. 1. It is like the part in which it is 
made, viz., the liver, which is red. 2. It is likewise sweet, because 
it is well digested and concocted; but if it hath a little 
earthly matter mixed with it, that makes it somewhat salt. 
Q. How is women’s blood thicker than men’s? Their coldness 
thickens, binds, congeals, and joins together. 
Q. How comes the blood to all parts of the body through 
the liver, and by what means? A. Through the principal veins, 
as the veins of the head, liver, etc., to nourish the body. 
Q. How doth the urine come into the bladder, seeing the bladder 
is shut? A. Some say sweatings; others, by a small skin in 
the bladder, which opens and lets in the urine. Urine is a certain 
and not deceitful messenger of the health or infirmity of 
man. Men make white urine in the morning, and before dinner 
red, but after dinner pale, and also after supper. 
Q. Why is it hurtful to drink much cold water? A. Because 
one contrary doth hinder and expel another; water is very 
cold, and lying so in the stomach, doth hinder digestion. 
Q. Why is it unwholesome to drink new wine? A. 1. It cannot 
be digested; therefore it causeth the belly to swell, and a 
kind of bloody flux. 2. It hinders making water. 
Q. Why do physicians forbid us to labour presently after 
dinner? A. 1. Because the motion hinders the virtue and 
power of digestion. 2. Because stirring immediately after dinner 
causes the different parts of the body to draw the meat to 
238 



The Works of Aristotle 

them, which often breeds sickness. 3. Because motion makes 
the food descend before it is digested. And after supper it is 
good to walk a little, that the food may go to the bottom of 
the stomach. 

Q. Why is it good to walk after dinner? A. Because it makes 
a man well disposed, and fortifies and strengthens the natural 
heat, causing the superfluity of the stomach to descend. 
Q. Why is it wholesome to vomit? A. It purges the stomach 
of all naughty humours, expelling them, which would breed 
again if they should remain in it; and purges the eyes and 
head, clearing the brain. 
Q. How comes sleep to strengthen the stomach and the digestive 
faculty? A. Because in sleep the heat draws inwards, 
and helps digestion; but when we awake, the heat returns, 
and is dispersed through the body. 
Of the Gall and Spleen 

Q. How come living creatures to have a gall? A. Because 
choleric humours are received into it, which through their 
acidity helps the guts to expel superfluities; also it helps digestion. 
Q. How comes the jaundice to proceed from the gall? A. 
The humour of the gall is bluish and yellow; therefore when 
its pores are stopped the humour cannot go into the sack 
thereof, but are mingled with the blood, wandering throughout 
all the body and infecting the skin. 
Q. Why hath a horse, mule, ass or cow a gall? A. Though 
these creatures have no gall in one place, as in a purse or 
vessel, yet they have one dispersed in small veins. 
Q. How comes the spleen to be black? A. It is occasioned by 
terrestrial and earthy matter of a black colour. According to 
physicians, the spleen is the receptacle of melancholy, and 
that is black. 
239 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why is he lean who hath a large spleen? A. Because the 
spleen draws much water to itself, which would turn to fat; 
therefore, men that have a small spleen are fat. 
Q. Why does the spleen cause men to laugh, as says Isidorus; 
“We laugh with the spleen, we are angry with the gall, we are 
wise with the heart, we love with the liver, we feel with the 
brain, and speak with the lungs”? A. The reason is, the spleen 
draws much melancholy to it, being its proper seat, the which 
melancholy proceeds from sadness, and is there consumed; 
and the cause failing, the effect doth so likewise. And by the 
same reason the gall causes anger, for choleric men are often 
angry, because they have much gall. 
Of Carnal Copulation 

Q. Why do living creatures use carnal copulation? A. Because 
it is most natural in them to get their like. 
Q. What is carnal copulation? A. It is a mutual action of 
male and female, with instruments ordained for that purpose 
to propagate their kind. 

Q. Why is this action good in those that use it lawfully and 
moderately? A. Because it eases and lightens the body, clears 
the mind, comforts the head and senses, and expels melancholy. 
Q. Why is immoderate carnal copulation hurtful? A. Because 
it destroys the sight, dries the body, and impairs the 
brain, often causes fevers and shortens life also. 
Q. Why doth carnal copulation injure melancholic or choleric 
men, especially thin men? A. Because it dries the bones 
much which are naturally so. On the contrary, it is good for 
the phlegmatic and sanguine, because they abound with that 
substance which by nature, is necessarily expelled. 
Q. Why should not the act be used when the body is full? A. 
Because it hinders digestion; and it is not good for a hungry 
belly, because it weakens. 
240 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why is it not good soon after a bath? A. Because then the 
pores are open, and the heat dispersed through the body: for 
after bathing, it cools the body too much. 
Q. Why is it not proper after vomiting or looseness? A. Because 
it is dangerous to purge twice a day; for in this act the 
veins are purged, and the guts by the vomit. 
Q. Why is there such delight in the act of venery? A. Because 
this act is such a contemptible thing in itself, that all 
creatures would naturally abhor it were there no pleasure in 
it; and therefore nature readily uses it, that all kinds of living 
things should be maintained and kept up. 
Q. Why do such as use it often take less delight in it than 
those who come to it seldom? A. 1. The passages of the seed 
are over large and wide; and therefore it makes no stay there, 
which would cause the delight. 2. Through often evacuation 
there is little seed left, and therefore no delight. 3. Because 
such, instead of seed there is cast out blood, undigested and 
raw, or some other watery substance, which is not hot, and 
therefore affords no delight. 

Of the Seed of Man and Beasts 

Q. How, and of what cometh the seed of man? A. Some 
philosophers and physicians say, it is superfluous humours; 
others say, that the seed is pure blood, flowing from the brain, 
concocted and whitened in the testicles; but sweat, urine, 
spittle, phlegm, choler, and the like, and blood dispersed 
throughout the whole body, come chiefly from the heart, 
liver and brain, because those parts are greatly weakened by 
casting seed; and therefore it appears that frequent carnal 
copulation is not good. 
Q. Why is a man’s seed white, and a woman’s red? A. It is 
white in men by reason of great heat and quick digestion, 
because it is rarefied in the testicles; but a woman’s is red, 
because her terms corrupt the undigested blood, and it hath 
its colour. 
241 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. How come females to have monthly courses? A. Because 
they are cold in respect of men, and because all their nourishment 
cannot be converted into blood, a great part of which 
turns to menses, which are monthly expelled. 
Q. For what reason do the menses not come down in females 
before the age of thirteen? A. Because young women 
are hot, and digest all their nourishment. 
Q. For what reason do they leave off at about fifty? A. Because 
nature is then so exhausted, they cannot expel them by 
reason of weakness. 
Q. Why have not breeding women the menses? A. Because 
that then they turn into milk, and into the nourishment of 
the child: for if a woman with child have them, it is a sign 
that she will miscarry. 
Q. Why are they termed menstrua, from the word mensis, a 
month? A. Because it is a space of time that measures the 
moon, as she ends her course in twenty-nine days, and fourteen 
hours. 

Q. Why do they continue longer with some than others, as 
with some six or seven, but commonly with all three days? 
A. The first are cold, therefore they increase most in them, 
and consequently are longer expelling; other women are hot, 
and therefore have fewer and are sooner expelled. 
Q. Are the menses which are expelled, and those by which 
the child is engendered, all one? A. No, because the one are 
unclean, and unfit for that purpose; but the other very pure 
and clear, therefore the fittest for generation. 
Q. Why have not women their menses all one and the same 
time, but some in the new moon, some in the full, and others 
at the wane? A. From their several complexions, and 
though all women (in respect of men) are phlegmatic, yet 
some are more sanguine than others, some more choleric; 
and as the moon hath her quarters, so have women their 
complexions; the first sanguine, the second choleric. 
242 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why do women easily conceive after their menses? A. 
Because the womb being cleansed, they are better prepared 
for conception. 
Q. Why do women look pale when they first have their 
menses upon them? A. Because the heat goes from the outward 
parts of the body to the inward, to help nature to expel 
their terms, which deprivation of heat doth cause a paleness 
in the face. Or, because that flux is caused of raw humours, 
which, when they run, make the face colourless. 
Q. Why do they at that time abhor their meat? A. Because 
nature labours more to expel their terms than digest; and, 
therefore, if they should eat, their food would remain raw in 
the stomach. 
Q. Why are some women barren and do not conceive? A. 1. 
It proceeds sometimes from the man who may be of a cold 
nature, so that his seed is unfit for generation. 2. Because it 
is waterish, and so doth not stay in the womb. 3. By reason 
that the seed of them both hath not a like proportion, as if 
the man be melancholy and the woman sanguine, or the 
man choleric and the woman phlegmatic. 

Q. Why do fat women seldom conceive? A. Because they 
have a slippery womb, and the seed will not stay in it. Or, 
because the mouth of the matrix is very strait, and the seed 
cannot enter it, or, if it does, it is so very slowly that it grows 
cold and unfit for generation. 
Q. Why do those of a hot constitution seldom conceive? A. 
Because the seed in them is extinguished or put out, as water 
cast into fire; whereof we find that women who vehemently 
desire the flesh seldom conceive. 
Q. Why are whores never with child? A. By reason of divers 
seeds, which corrupt and spoil the instruments of conception, 
for it makes them so slippery, that they cannot retain 
seed. Or, else, it is because one man’s seed destroys another’s, 
so neither is good for generation. 
Q. Why do women conceive twins? A. Because there are 
243 



The Works of Aristotle 

seven cells or receptacles in the womb; wherefore they may 
naturally have so many children at once as there falls seed 
into these cells. 

Q. Why are twins but half men, and not so strong as others? 
A. The seed that should have been for one, is divided into 
two and therefore they are weakly and seldom live long. 
Of Hermaphrodites 

Q. How are hermaphrodites begotten? A. Nature doth always 
tend to that which is best, and always intendeth to 
beget the male and not the female, because the female is 
only for the male’s mate. Therefore the male is sometimes 
begotten in all its principal parts; and, yet, through the indisposition 
of the womb and object, and inequality of the 
seeds, when nature cannot perfect the male, she brings forth 
the female too. And therefore natural philosophers say, that 
an hermaphrodite is impotent in the privy parts of a man, as 
appears by experience. 
Q. Is an hermaphrodite accounted a man or a woman? A. It 
is to be considered in which member he is fittest for copulation; 
if he be fittest in the woman’s, then he is a woman; if in 
a man’s, then he is a man. 
Q. Should he be baptized in the name of a man or a woman? 
A. In the name of a man, because names are given ad placitum, 
and therefore he should be baptized, according to the worthiest 
name, because every agent is worthier than its patient. 
Of Monsters 

Q. Doth nature make any monsters? A. She doth; if she did 
not, then would she be deprived of her end. For of things 
possible, she doth always propose to bring forth that which 
is most perfect and best; but in the end, through the evil 
disposition of the matter, not being able to bring forth that 
which she intended, she brings forth that which she can. As 
it happened in Albertus’s time, when in a certain village, a 
cow brought forth a calf, half a man; then the countrymen 
244 



The Works of Aristotle 

suspecting a shepherd, would have burnt him with the cow; 
but Albertus, being skilled in astronomy, said that this did 
proceed from a certain constellation, and so delivered the 
shepherd from their hands. 

Q. Are they one or two? A. To find out, you must look into 
the heart, if there be two hearts, there be two men. 
Q. Why are some children like their father, some like their 
mother, some to both and some to neither? A. If the seed of 
the father wholly overcome that of the mother the child doth 
resemble the father; but if the mother’s predominate, then it 
is like the mother; but if he be like neither, that doth sometimes 
happen through the four qualities, sometimes through 
the influence of some heavenly constellation. 
Q. Why are children oftener like the father than the mother? 
A. It proceeds from the imagination of the mother in the act 
of copulation, as appeared in a queen who had her imagination 
on a blackamoor; and in the Ethiopian queen who 
brought forth a white child, because her imagination was 
upon a white colour; as is seen in Jacob’s skill in casting rods 
of divers colours into the water, when his sheep went to ram. 

Q. Why do children born in the eighth month for the most 
part die quickly, and why are they called the children of the 
moon? A. Because the moon is a cold planet, which has dominion 
over the child, and therefore doth bind it with coldness, 
which is the cause of its death. 
Q. Why doth a child cry as soon as it is born? A. Because of 
the sudden change from heat to cold: which cold doth affect 
its tenderness. Another reason is, because the child’s soft and 
tender body is wringed and put together coming out of the 
narrow and strait passage of the matrix, and especially, the 
brain being moist, and the head being pressed and wrinkled 
together, is the cause that some humours distil by the eyes, 
which are the cause of tears and weeping. 
Q. Why doth the child put its fingers into its mouth as soon 
as it cometh into the world? A. Because that coming out of 
the womb it cometh out of a hot bath, and entering into the 
245 



The Works of Aristotle 

cold, puts them into its mouth for want of heat. 

Of the Child in the Womb 

Q. How is the child engendered in the womb? A. The first 
six days the seed hath this colour of milk, but in the six following 
a red colour, which is near unto the disposition of 
the flesh; and then it is changed into a thick substance of 
blood. But in the twelve days following, this substance becomes 
so thick and round that it is capable of receiving shape 
and form. 
Q. Doth the child in the womb void excrements or make 
water? No. Because it hath not the first digestion which is in 
the stomach. It receives no food by the mouth, but by the 
navel; therefore, makes no urine but sweats, which is but 
little, and is received in a skin in the matrix, which at the 
birth is cast out. 
Of Abortion and Untimely Birth 

Q. Why do women that eat unwholesome meats, easily miscarry? 
A. Because they breed putrefied seed, which the mind 
abhorring doth cast it out of the womb as unfit for the shape 
which is adapted to receive the soul. 
Q. Why doth wrestling and leaping cause the casting of the 
child, as some subtle women do on purpose? A. The vapour 
is burning, and doth easily hurt the tender substance of the 
child, entering in at the pores of the matrix. 
Q. Why doth much joy cause a woman to miscarry? A. Because 
in the time of joy, a woman is destitute of heat, and so 
a miscarriage doth follow. 
Q. Why do women easily miscarry when they are first with 
child, viz., the first, second or third month? A. As apples and 
pears easily fall at first, because the knots and ligaments are 
weak, so it is with a child in the womb. 
246 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why is it hard to miscarry in the third, fourth, fifth and 
sixth month? A. Because the ligaments are stronger and well 
fortified. 
Of Divers Matters 

Q. Why has not a man a tail like a beast? A. Because man is 
a noble creature, whose property is to sit; which a beast, having 
a tail, cannot. 
Q. Why does hot water freeze sooner than cold? A. Hot water 
is thinner, and gives better entrance to the frost. 
Q. Why is every living creature dull after copulation? A. By 
reason that the act is filthy and unclean; and so every living 
creature abhors it. When men do think upon it, they are 
ashamed and sad. 
Q. Why cannot drunken men judge of taste as well as sober 
men? A. Because the tongue, being full of pores and spongy, 
receives more moisture into it, and more in drunken men 
than in sober; therefore, the tongue, through often drinking, 
is full of bad humours, and so the faculty of tasting is 
rendered out of order; also, through the thickening of the 
taste itself, drink taken by drunkards is not presently felt. 
And by this may also be understood why drunkards have 
not a perfect speech. 

Q. Why have melancholy beasts long ears? A. The ears proceed 
from a dry and cold substance, called gristle, which is 
apt to become bone; and because melancholy beasts do 
abound with this kind of substance, they have long ears. 
Q. Why do hares sleep with their eyes open? A. 1. They have 
their eyes standing out, and their eyelids short, therefore, 
never quite shut. 2. They are timorous, and as a safe-guard 
to themselves, sleep with their eyes open. 
Q. Why do not crows feed their young till they be nine days 
old? A. Because seeing them of another colour, they think 
they are of another kind. 
247 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why are sheep and pigeons mild? A. They want galls, the 
cause of anger. 
Q. Why have birds their stones inward? A. Because if outward, 
they would hinder their flying and lightness. 
Q. How comes it that birds do not piss? A. Because that 
superfluity which would be converted into urine, is turned 
into feathers. 
Q. Why do we hear better in the night than by day? A. Because 
there is a greater quietness in the night than in the day, 
for the sun doth not exhale the vapours by night, but it doth 
in the day, therefore the moon is more fit than in the day; 
and the moon being fit, the motion is better received, which 
is said to be caused by a sound. 
Q. For what reason doth a man laugh sooner when touched 
in the armpits than in any other part of the body? A. Because 
there is in that place a meeting of many sinews, and 
the mean we touch, which is the flesh, is more subtle than in 
other parts, and therefore of finer feeling. When a man is 
moderately and gently touched there the spirits that are dispersed 
run into the face and causes laughter. 

Q. Why do some women love white men and some black 
men? A. 1. Some have weak sight, and such delight in black, 
because white doth hurt the sight more than black. 2. Because 
like delight in like; but some women are of a hot nature, 
and such are delighted with black, because blackness 
followeth heat; and others are of a cold nature, and those are 
delighted with white, because cold produces white. 
Q. Why do men incline to sleep after labour? A. Because, 
through continual moving, the heat is dispersed to the external 
parts of the body, which, after labour, is gathered together 
in the internal parts, there to digest; and from digestion, 
vapours arise from the heart to the brain, which stop 
the passage by which the natural heat should be dispersed to 
the external part; and then, the external parts being cold and 
thick, by reason of the coldness of the brain sleep is easily 
procured. By this it appeareth that such as eat and drink too 
248 



The Works of Aristotle 

much, do sleep much and long, because there are great store 
of humours and vapours bred in such persons which cannot 
be consumed and digested by the natural heat. 

Q. Why are such as sleep much, evil disposed and illcoloured? 
A. Because in too much sleep moisture is gathered 
together, which cannot be consumed, and so it doth covet to 
go out through the superficial parts of the body, and especially 
it resorts to the face, and therefore is the cause of bad 
colours, as appeareth in such as are phlegmatic and who desire 
more sleep than others. 
Q. Why do some imagine in their sleep that they eat and 
drink sweet things? A. Because the phlegm drawn up by the 
jaws doth distil and drop to the throat; and this phlegm is 
sweet after a sore sweat, and that seemeth so to them. 
Q. Why do some dream in their sleep that they are in the 
water and drowned, and some that they were in the water 
and not drowned; especially such as are phlegmatic? A. Because 
when the phlegmatic substance doth turn to the high 
parts of the body, then many think they are in the water and 
drowned; but when that substance draweth into the internal 
parts, then they think they escape. Another reason may be, 
overmuch repletion and drunkenness: and therefore, when 
men are overmuch filled with meat, the fumes and vapours 
ascend and gather together, and they think they are drowned 
and strangled; but if they cannot ascend so high then they 
seem to escape. 

Q. May a man procure a dream by an external cause? A. It 
may be done. If a man speak softly in another man’s ear and 
awake him not, then of his stirring of the spirits there are 
thunderings and buzzings in the head, which cause 
dreamings. 
Q. How many humours are there in a man’s body? A. Four, 
whereof every one hath its proper place. The first is choler, 
called by physicians flava bilis, which is placed in the liver. 
The second is melancholy, called atra bilis, whose seat is in 
the spleen. The third is phlegm, whose place is in the head. 
The fourth is blood, whose place is in the heart. 
249 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. What condition and quality hath a man of a sanguine 
complexion? A. It is fair and beautiful; hath his hair for the 
most part smooth; is bold; retaineth that which he hath conceived; 
is shame-faced, given to music, a lover of sciences, 
liberal, courteous, and not desirous of revenge. 
Q. What properties do follow those of a phlegmatic complexion? 
A. They are dull of wit, their hair never curls, they 
are seldom very thirsty, much given to sleep, dream of things 
belonging to water, are fearful, covetous, given to heap up 
riches, and are weak in the act of venery. 
Q. What are the properties of a choleric man? A. He is brown 
in complexion, unquiet, his veins hidden, eateth little and 
digesteth less, dreameth of dark and confused things, is sad, 
fearful, exceedingly covetous, and incontinent. 
Q. What dreams do follow these complexions? A. Pleasant, 
merry dreams do follow the sanguine; fearful dreams, the 
melancholic; the choleric dream of children fighting and fire; 
the phlegmatic dream of water. This is the reason why a man’s 
complexion is said to be known by his dreams. 

Q. What is the reason that if you cover an egg over with salt, 
and let it lie in it a few days, all the meat within is consumed? 
A. A great dryness of the salt consumes the substance 
of the egg. 
Q. Why is the melancholic complexion the worst? A. Because 
it proceeds from the dregs of the blood, is an enemy to 
mirth and bringeth on aged appearance and death, being 
cold and dry. 
Q. What is the cause that some men die joyful, and some in 
extreme grief? A. Over-great joy doth overmuch heat the internal 
parts of the body; and overmuch grief doth drown 
and suffocate the heart, which failing, a man dieth. 
Q. Why hath a man so much hair on his head? A. The hair 
on his head proceeds from the vapours which arise from the 
stomach, and ascend to the head, and also of the superfluities 
which are in the brain; and those two passing through 
250 



The Works of Aristotle 

the pores of the head are converted into hair, by reason of 
the heat and dryness of the head. And because man’s body is 
full of humours, and he hath more brains than any other 
living creatures. 

Q. How many ways is the brain purged and other hidden 
places of the body? A. Four; the watery and gross humours 
are purged by the eyes, melancholy by the ears, choler by the 
nose, and phlegm by the hair. 
Q. What is the reason that such as are very fat in their youth, 
are in danger of dying on a sudden? A. Such have very small 
and close veins, by reason of their fatness, so that the air and 
the breath can hardly have free course in them; and thereupon 
the natural heat wanting the refreshment of air, is put 
out, and as it were, quenched. 
Q. Why do garlic and onions grow after they are gathered? 
A. It proceedeth from the humidity that is in them. 
Q. Why do men feel cold sooner than women? A. Because 
men, being more hot than women, have their pores more 
open, and therefore it doth sooner enter into them than 
women. 

Q. Why are not old men so subject to the plague as young 
men and children? A. They are cold, and their pores are not 
so open as in youth; and therefore the infecting air doth not 
penetrate so soon by reason of their coldness. 
Q. Why do we cast water in a man’s face when he swooneth? 
A. Because through the coldness of water the heat may run 
to the heart, and so give strength. 
Q. Why are those waters best and most delicate which run 
towards the rising sun? A. Because they are soonest stricken 
with the sunbeams, and made pure and subtle, the sun having 
them under it, and by that means taking off the coldness 
and gross vapours which they gather from the ground they 
run through. 
Q. Why have women such weak and small voices? A. Be251 



The Works of Aristotle 

cause their instruments and organs of speaking, by reason of 
their coldness, are small and narrow; and therefore, receiving 
but little air, cause the voice to be effeminate. 

Q. Whereof doth it proceed that want of sleep doth weaken 
the brain and body? A. Much watching doth engender choler, 
the which being hot both dry up and lessen the humours 
which serve the brain, the head, and other parts of the body. 
Q. Wherefore doth vinegar so readily staunch blood? A. From 
its cold virtue, for all cold is naturally binding, and vinegar 
being cold, hath the like property. 
Q. Why is sea-water salter in summer than in winter? A. 
From the heat of the sun, seeing by experiment that a salt 
thing being heated becometh more salt. 
Q. Why do men live longer in hot regions than in cold? A. 
Because they may be more dry, and by that means the natural 
heat is better preserved in them than in cold countries. 
Q. Why is well-water seldom or ever good? A. All water which 
standeth still in the spring and is never heated by the sunbeams, 
is very heavy, and hath much matter in it, and therefore 
wanting the heat of the sun, is naught. 
Q. Why do men sleep better and more at ease on the right 
side than on the left? A. Because when they be on the left 
side, the lungs do lie upon and cover the heart, which is on 
that side under the pap; now the heart, the fountain of life, 
being thus occupied and hindered with the lungs, cannot 
exercise its own proper operation, as being overmuch heated 
with the lungs lying upon it, and therefore wanting the refreshment 
of the air which the lungs do give it, like the blowing 
of a pair of bellows, is choked and suffocated, but by 
lying on the right side, those inconveniences are avoided. 
Q. What is the reason that old men sneeze with great difficulty? 
A. Because that through their coldness their arteries 
are very narrow and close, and therefore the heat is not of 
force to expel the cold. 
252 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why doth a drunken man think that all things about 
him do turn round? A. Because the spirits which serve the 
sight are mingled with vapours and fumes, arising from the 
liquors he has drunk; the overmuch heat causeth the eye to 
be in continual motion, and the eye being round, causeth all 
things about it to seem to go round. 
Q. Wherefore doth it proceed, that bread which is made 
with salt is lighter than that which is made without it, considering 
that salt is very heavy of itself? A. Although bread is 
very heavy of itself, yet the salt dries it and makes it light, by 
reason of the heat which it hath; and the more heat there is 
in it, the better the bread is, and the lighter and more wholesome 
for the body. 
Q. Why is not new bread good for the stomach? A. Because 
it is full of moistness, and thick, hot vapours, which do corrupt 
the blood, and hot bread is blacker than cold, because 
heat is the mother of blackness, and because the vapours are 
not gone out of it. 
Q. Why do lettuces make a man sleep? A. Because they engender 
gross vapours. 
Q. Why do the dregs of wine and oil go to the bottom, and 
those of honey swim uppermost? A. Because the dregs of 
wine and oil are earthly, and therefore go to the bottom; but 
honey is a liquid that cometh from the stomach and belly of 
the bee; and is there in some sort putrefied and made subtle; 
on which account the dregs are most light and hot, and therefore 
go uppermost. 
Q. Why do cats’ and wolves’ eyes shine in the night, and not 
in the day? A. The eyes of these beasts are by nature more 
crystalline than the eyes of other beasts, and therefore do so 
shine in darkness; but the brightness of the sun doth hinder 
them from being seen in the day-time. 
Q. What is the reason that some men, if they see others dance, 
do the like with their hands and feet, or by other gestures of 
the body? A. Because the sight having carried and represented 
unto the mind that action, and judging the same to be pleas253 



The Works of Aristotle 

ant and delightful, and therefore the imagination draweth 
the like of it in conceit and stirs up the body by the gestures. 

Q. Why does much sleep cause some to grow fat and some 
lean? A. Those who are of ill complexion, when they sleep, 
do consume and digest the superfluities of what they have 
eaten, and therefore become fat. But such as are of good 
complexion, when they sleep are more cold, and digest less. 
Q. How much, and from what cause do we suffer hunger 
better than thirst? A. When the stomach hath nothing else 
to consume, it consumeth the phlegm and humours which 
it findeth most ready and most at hand; and therefore we 
suffer hunger better than thirst, because the heat hath nothing 
to refresh itself with. 
Q. Why doth the hair fall after a great sickness? A. Where 
the sickness is long, as in the ague, the humours of the head 
are dried up through overmuch heat, and, therefore, wanting 
nourishment, the hair falls. 
Q. Why doth the hair of the eyebrows grow long in old men? 
A. Because through their age the bones are thin through want 
of heat, and therefore the hair doth grow there, by reason of 
the rheum of the eye. 
Q. Whereof proceedeth gaping? A. Of gross vapours, which 
occupy the vital spirits of the head, and of the coldness of 
the senses causing sleepiness. 
Q. What is the reason that some flowers do open with the 
sun rising, and shut with the sun setting? A. Cold doth close 
and shut, as hath been said, but the heat of the sun doth 
open and enlarge. Some compare the sun to the soul of the 
body; for as the soul giveth life, so the sun doth give life, and 
vivificate all things; but cold bringeth death, withering and 
decaying all things. 
Q. Why doth grief cause men to grow old and grey? A. Age 
is nothing else but dryness and want of humours in the body; 
grief then causeth alteration, and heat dryness; age and greyness 
follow immediately. 
254 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why are gelded beasts weaker than such as are not gelded? 
A. Because they have less heat, and by that means less force 
and strength. 
THE PROBLEMS OF 

MARCUS ANTONINUS SANCTIPERTIAS 

Q. Why is it esteemed, in the judgment of the most wise, 
the hardest thing to know a man’s self? A. Because nothing 
can be known that is of so great importance to man for the 
regulation of his conduct in life. Without this knowledge, 
man is like the ship without either compass or rudder to 
conduct her to port, and is tossed by every passion and prejudice 
to which his natural constitution is subjected. To know 
the form and perfection of man’s self, according to the philosophers, 
is a task too hard; and a man, says Plato, is nothing, 
or if he be anything, he is nothing, but his soul. 
Q. Why is a man, though endowed with reason, the most 
unjust of all living creatures? A. Because only man is desirous 
of honour; and so it happens that every one covets to 
seem good, and yet naturally shuns labour, though he attain 
no virtue by it. 
255 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why doth immoderate copulation do more hurt than 
immoderate letting of blood? A. The seed is full of nutriment, 
and better prepared for the nurture of the body, than 
the blood; for the blood is nourished by the seed. 
Q. What is the reason that those that have long yards cannot 
beget children? A. The seed, in going a long distance, doth 
lose the spirit, and therefore becomes cold and unfit. 
Q. Why do such as are corpulent cast forth but little seed in 
the act of copulation, and are often barren? A. Because the 
seed of such goeth to nourish the body. For the same reason 
corpulent women have but few menses. 
Q. How come women to be prone to venery in the summer 
time and men in the winter? A. In summer the man’s testicles 
hang down and are feebler than in winter, or because 
hot natures become more lively in the cold season; for a man 
is hot and dry, and a woman cold and moist; and therefore 
in summer the strength of men decays, and that of women 
increases, and they grow livelier by the benefit of the contrary 
quality. 

Q. Why is man the proudest of all living creatures? A. By 
reason of his great knowledge; or, as philosophers say, all 
intelligent beings having understanding, nothing remains that 
escapes man’s knowledge in particular; or it is because he 
hath rule over all earthly creatures, and all things seem to be 
brought under his dominion. 
Q. Why have beasts their hearts in the middle of their breasts, 
and man his inclining to the left? A. To moderate the cold 
on that side. 
Q. Why doth the woman love the man best who has got her 
maidenhead? A. By reason of shame-facedness; Plato saith, 
shame-facedness doth follow love, or, because it is the beginning 
of great pleasure, which doth bring a great alteration in 
the whole body, whereby the powers of the mind are much 
delighted, and stick and rest immoveable in the same. 
Q. How come hairy people to be more lustful than any other? 
256 



The Works of Aristotle 

A. Because they are said to have greater store of excrements 
and seed as philosophers assert. 
Q. What is the cause that the suffocation of the matrix, which 
happens to women through strife and contention, is more 
dangerous than the detaining of the flowers? A. Because the 
more perfect an excrement is in its natural disposition, the 
worse it is when it is altered from that disposition, and drawn 
to the contrary quality; as is seen in vinegar, which is sharpest 
when it is made of the best wine. And so it happens that 
the more men love one another the more they fall into variance 
and discord. 
Q. How come women’s bodies to be looser, softer and less 
than man’s; and why do they want hair? A. By reason of their 
menses; for with them their superfluities go away, which 
would produce hair; and thereby the flesh is filled, consequently 
the veins are more hid in women than in men. 
Q. What is the reason that when we think upon a horrible 
thing, we are stricken with fear? A. Because the conceit or 
imagination of things has force and virtue. For Plato saith, 
the fancy of things has some affinity with things themselves; 
for the image and representation of cold and heat is such as 
the nature of things are. Or it is this, because when we comprehend 
any dreadful matter, the blood runneth to the internal 
parts; and therefore the external parts are cold and 
shake with fear. 

Q. Why doth a radish root help digestion and yet itself 
remaineth undigested? A. Because the substance consisteth 
of divers parts; for there are some thin parts in it, which are 
fit to digest meat, the which being dissolved, there doth remain 
some thick and close substance in it, which the heat 
cannot digest. 
Q. Why do such as cleave wood, cleave it easier in the length 
than athwart? A. Because in the wood there is a grain, 
whereby, if it be cut in length, in the very cutting, one part 
naturally separateth from another. 
Q. What is the reason, that if a spear be stricken on the end, 
257 



The Works of Aristotle 

the sound cometh sooner to one who standeth near, than to 
him who striketh? A. Because, as hath been said, there is a 
certain long grain in wood, directly forward, filled with air, 
but on the other side there is none, and therefore a beam or 
spear being stricken on the end, the air which is hidden 
receiveth a sound in the aforesaid grain which serveth for its 
passage; and, seeing the sound cannot go easily out of it is 
carried into the ear of him who is opposite; as those passages 
do not go from side to side, a sound cannot be distinctly 
heard there. 

Q. Why are the thighs and calves of the legs of men flesh, 
seeing the legs of beasts are not so? A. Because men only go 
upright; and therefore nature hath given the lower parts corpulency, 
and taken it away from the upper; and thus she 
hath made the buttocks, the thighs, and calves of the legs 
fleshy. 
Q. Why are the sensible powers in the heart; yet if the hinder 
part of the brain be hurt, the memory suffereth by it; if the 
forepart, the imagination; if the middle, the cogitative part? 
A. It is because the brain is appointed by nature to cool the 
blood of the heart; whereof it is, that in divers of its parts it 
serveth the powers and instruments with their heart, for every 
action of the soul doth not proceed from one measure of 
heat. 
258 



The Works of Aristotle 

THE PROBLEMS OF 

ALEXANDER APHRODISEUS 

Q. Why doth the sun make a man black and dirt white, wax 
soft and dirt hard? A. By reason of the disposition of the 
substance that doth suffer. All humours, phlegm excepted, 
when heated above measure, do seem black about the skin; 
and dirt, being full either of saltpetre, or salt liquor, when 
the sun hath consumed its dregs and filth, doth become white 
again. When the sun hath stirred up and drawn the humidity 
of the wax, it is softened; but in the dirt, the sun doth 
consume the humidity, which is very much and makes it 
hard. 
Q. Why are round ulcers hard to be cured? A. Because they 
are bred of a sharp choler, which eats and gnaws; and because 
it doth run, dropping and gnawing, it makes a round 
ulcer; for which reason it requires dry medicines, as physicians 
assert. 
Q. Why is honey sweet to all men, but to such as have jaundice? 
A. Because they have much bitter choler all over their 
bodies, which abounds in the tongue; whence it happens 
when they eat honey the humours are stirred, and the taste 
itself, by the bitterness of choler, causes an imagination that 
the honey is bitter. 
Q. Why doth water cast on serpents, cause them to fly? A. 
Because they are dry and cold by nature, having but little 
blood, and therefore fly from excessive coldness. 
Q. Why doth an egg break if roasted, and not if boiled? A. 
When moisture comes near the fire, it is heated very much, 
and so breeds wind, which being put up in little room, forces 
its way out, and breaks the shell: the like happens in tubs or 
earthen vessels when new wine is put into them; too much 
phlegm breaks the shell of an egg in roasting; it is the same 
with earthen pots too much heated; wherefore some people 
wet an egg when they intend to roast it. Hot water, by its 
softness, doth dissipate its humidity by little and little, and 
dissolves it through the thinness and passages of the shell. 
259 



The Works of Aristotle 

Q. Why do men wink in the act of copulation, and find a 
little alteration in all other senses? A. Because, being overcome 
by the effect of that pleasure, they do comprehend it 
the better. 
Q. Why have children gravel breeding in their bladders, and 
old men in their kidneys and veins? A. Because children have 
straight passages in their kidneys, and an earthly thick 
humour is thrust with violence by the urine to the bladder, 
which hath wide conduits or passages, that give room for the 
urine and humour whereof gravel is engendered, which waxes 
thick, and seats itself, as the manner of it is. In old men it is 
the reverse, for they have wide passages of the veins, back 
and kidneys, that the urine may pass away, and the earthly 
humour congeal and sink down; the colour of the gravel 
shows the humour whereof the stone comes. 
Q. Why is it, if the stone do congeal and wax hard through 
heat, we use not contrary things to dissolve it by coldness, 
but light things, as parsley, fennel and the like? A. It is 
thought, to fall out by an excessive scorching heat, by which 
the stones do crumble into sand, as in the manner of earthen 
vessels, which, when they are overheated or roasted, turn to 
sand. And by this means it happens that small stones are 
avoided, together with sand, in making water. Sometimes 
cold drink thrusts out the stone, the kidneys being stretched 
and casting it out by a great effort; thus easing the belly of its 
burden. Besides, it often happens that immoderate heat of 
the kidneys, or of the veins of the back (through which the 
stone doth grow) is quenched with coldness. 

Q. Why is the curing of an ulcer or bile in the kidneys or 
bladder very hard? A. Because the urine being sharp, doth 
ulcerate the sore. Ulcers are worse to cure in the bladder 
than in the kidneys, because urine stays in the former, but 
runs away from the latter. 
Q. Why do chaff and straw keep water hot, but make snow 
cold? A. Because the nature of chaff wants a manifest quantity; 
seeing, therefore that of its own nature, it can easily be 
mingled, and consumed by that which it is annexed onto, it 
easily assumes the same nature, and being put into hot things, 
260 



The Works of Aristotle 

it is easily hot, heats again, and keeps hot; and on the contrary, 
being made cold by the snow, and making the snow 
cold it keeps in its coldness. 

Q. Why have we oftentimes a pain in making water? A. Because 
sharp choler issuing out, and pricking the bladder of 
the urine, doth provoke and stir up the whole body to ease 
the part offended, and to expel the humour moderately. This 
doth happen most of all unto children, because they have 
moist excrements by reason of their often drinking. 
Q. Why have some medicines of one kind contrary effects, 
as experience proves; for mastich doth expel, dissolve and 
also knit; and vinegar cools and heats? A. Because there are 
some small invisible bodies in them, not in confusion, but 
by interposition; as sand moistened doth clog together and 
seem to be but one body, though indeed there are many small 
bodies in sand. And since this is so, it is not absurd that the 
contrary qualities and virtues should be hidden in mastich, 
and that nature hath given that virtue to these bodies. 
Q. Why do nurses rock and move their children when they 
would rock them to sleep? A. To the end that the humours 
being scattered by moving, may move the brains; but those 
of more years cannot endure this. 
Q. Why doth oil, being drunk, cause one to vomit, and especially 
yellow choler? A. Because being light, and ascending 
upwards it provoketh the nutriment in the stomach, and 
lifteth it up; and so, the stomach being grieved, summoneth 
the ejective virtue to vomit, and especially choler, because 
that is light and consisteth of subtle parts, and therefore the 
sooner carried upward; for when it is mingled with any moist 
thing, it runneth into the highest room. 
Q. Why doth not oil mingle with moist things? A. Because, 
being pliant, soft and thick in itself, it cannot be divided 
into parts, and so cannot be mingled; neither if it be put on 
the earth can it enter into it. 
Q. Why are water and oil frozen in cold weather, and wine 
and vinegar not? A. Because that oil being without quality, 
261 



The Works of Aristotle 

and fit to be compounded with anything, is cold quickly 
and so extremely that it is most cold. Water being cold of 
nature, doth easily freeze when it is made colder than its 
own nature. Wine being hot, and of subtle parts, suffereth 
no freezing. 

Q. Why do contrary things in quality bring forth the same 
effect? A. That which is moist is hardened and bound alike 
by heat and cold. Snow and liquid do freeze with cold; a 
plaster and gravel in the bladder are made dry with heat. 
The effect indeed is the same, but by two divers actions; the 
heat doth consume and eat the abundance of moisture; but 
the cold stopping and shutting with its over much thickness, 
doth wring out the filthy humidity, like as a sponge wrung 
with the hand doth cast out the water which it hath in the 
pores and small passages. 
Q. Why doth a shaking or quivering seize us oftentimes when 
any fearful matter doth happen, as a great noise or a crack 
made, the sudden downfall of water, or the fall of a large 
tree? A. Because that oftentimes the humours being digested 
and consumed by time and made thin and weak, all the heat 
vehemently, suddenly and sharply flying into the inward part 
of the body, consumeth the humours which cause the disease. 
So treacle hath this effect, and many such like, which 
are hot and dry when taken after connexion. 

Q. Why do steel glasses shine so clearly? A. Because they are 
lined in the inside with white lead, whose nature is shining, 
and being put to glass, which is lucid and transparent, doth 
shine much more; and casts its beams through its passages, 
and without the body of the glass; and by that means the 
glass is very shining and clear. 
Q. Why do we see ourselves in glasses and clear water? A. 
Because the quality of the sight, passing into the bright bodies 
by reflection, doth return again on the beam of the eyes, 
as the image of him who looketh on it. 
Q. What is the reason that if you cast a stone in standing 
water which is near the surface of the earth, it causes many 
circles, and not if the water be deep in the earth? A. Because 
262 



The Works of Aristotle 

the stone, with the vehemence of the cast, doth agitate the 
water in every part of it, until it come to the bottom; and if 
there be a very great vehemence in the throw, the circle is still 
greater, the stone going down to the bottom causing many 
circles. For, first of all, it doth divide the outermost and superficial 
parts of the water in many parts, and so, always going 
down to the bottom, again dividing the water, it maketh another 
circle, and this is done successively until the stone resteth; 
and because the vehemence of the stone is slackened, still as it 
goes down, of necessity the last circle is less than the first, 
because by that and also by its force the water is divided. 

Q. Why are such as are deaf by nature, dumb? A. Because 
they cannot speak and express that which they never hear. 
Some physicians do say, that there is one knitting and uniting 
of sinews belonging to the like disposition. But such as 
are dumb by accident are not deaf at all, for then there ariseth 
a local passion. 
Q. Why doth itching arise when an ulcer doth wax whole 
and phlegm ceases? A. Because the part which is healed and 
made sound doth pursue the relic of the humours which 
remained there against nature, and which was the cause of 
the bile, and so going out through the skin, and dissolving 
itself, doth originally cause the itch. 

Q. How comes a man to sneeze oftener and more vehemently 
than a beast? A. Because he uses more meats and drinks, and 
of more different sorts, and that more than is requisite; the 
which, when he cannot digest as he would, he doth gather 
together much air and spirit, by reason of much humidity; 
the spirits then very subtle, ascending into the head, often 
force a man to void them, and so provoke sneezing. The 
noise caused thereby proceeds from a vehement spirit or 
breath passing through the conduit of the nostrils, as belching 
doth from the stomach or farting by the fundament, the 
voice by the throat, and a sound by the ear. 
Q. How come the hair and nails of dead people to grow? A. 
Because the flesh rotting, withering and falling away, that 
which was hidden about the root of the hair doth now appear 
as growing. Some say that it grows indeed, because car263 



The Works of Aristotle 

casses are dissolved in the beginning to many excrements 
and superfluities by putrefaction. These going out at the 
uppermost parts of the body by some passages, do increase 
the growth of the hair. 

Q. Why does not the hair of the feet soon grow grey? A. For 
this reason, because that through great motion they disperse 
and dissolve the superfluous phlegm that breeds greyness. The 
hair of the secrets grows very late, because of the place, and 
because that in carnal copulation it dissolves the phlegm also. 
Q. Why, if you put hot burnt barley upon a horse’s sore, is 
the hair which grows upon the sore not white, but like the 
other hair? A. Because it hath the force of expelling; and 
doth drive away and dissolve the phlegm, as well as all other 
unprofitable matter that is gathered together through the 
weakness of the parts, or condity of the sore. 
Q. Why doth the hair never grow on an ulcer or bile? A. 
Because man hath a thick skin, as is seen by the thickness of 
his hair; and if the scar be thicker than the skin itself, it stops 
the passages from whence the hair should grow. Horses have 
thinner skins, as is plain by their hair; therefore all passages 
are not stopped in their wounds and sores; and after the excrements 
which were gathered together have broken a passage 
through those small pores the hair doth grow. 

Q. Why is Fortune painted with a double forehead, the one 
side bald and the other hairy? A. The baldness signifies adversity, 
and hairiness prosperity, which we enjoy when it 
pleaseth her. 
Q. Why have some commended flattery? A. Because flattery 
setteth forth before our eyes what we ought to be, though 
not what we are. 
Q. Wherefore should virtue be painted girded? A. To show 
that virtuous men should not be slothful, but diligent and 
always in action. 
Q. Why did the ancients say it was better to fall into the 
hands of a raven than a flatterer? A. Because ravens do not 
264 



The Works of Aristotle 

eat us till we be dead, but flatterers devour us alive. 

Q. Why have choleric men beards before others? A. Because 
they are hot, and their pores large. 
Q. How comes it that such as have the hiccups do ease themselves 
by holding their breath? A. The breath retained doth 
heat the interior parts of the body, and the hiccups proceeds 
from cold. 
Q. How comes it that old men remember well what they 
have seen and done in their youth, and forget such things as 
they see and do in their old age? A. Things learned in youth 
take deep root and habitude in a person, but those learned 
in age are forgotten because the senses are then weakened. 
Q. What kind of covetousness is best? A. That of time when 
employed as it ought to be. 
Q. Why is our life compared to a play? A. Because the dishonest 
do occupy the place of the honest, and the worst sort 
the room of the good. 

Q. Why do dolphins, when they appear above the water, 
denote a storm or tempest approaching? A. Because at the 
beginning of a tempest there do arise from the bottom of the 
sea, certain hot exhalations and vapours which heat the dolphins, 
causing them to rise up for cold air. 
Q. Why did the Romans call Fabius Maximus the target of 
the people, and Marcellus the sword? A. Because the one 
adapted himself to the service of the commonwealth, and 
the other was very eager to revenge the injuries of his country; 
and yet they were in the senate joined together, because 
the gravity of the one would moderate the courage and boldness 
of the other. 
Q. Why doth the shining of the moon hurt the head? A. 
Because it moves the humours of the brain, and cannot afterwards 
dissolve them. 
Q. If water do not nourish, why do men drink it? A. Because 
265 



The Works of Aristotle 

water causeth the nutriment to spread through the body. 

Q. Why is sneezing good? A. Because it purgeth the brain as 
milk is purged by the cough. 
Q. Why is hot water lighter than cold? A. Because boiling 
water has less ventosity and is more light and subtle, the 
earthly and heavy substance being separated from it. 
Q. How comes marsh and pond water to be bad? A. By reason 
they are phlegmatic, and do corrupt in summer; the fineness 
of water is turned into vapours, and the earthiness doth 
remain. 
Q. Why are studious and learned men soonest bald? A. It 
proceeds from a weakness of the spirits, or because warmth 
of digestion cause phlegm to abound in them. 
Q. Why doth much watching make the brain feeble? A. Because 
it increases choler, which dries and extenuates the body. 
Q. Why are boys apt to change their voices about fourteen 
years of age? A. Because that then nature doth cause a great 
and sudden change of voice; experience proves this to be 
true; for at that time we may see that women’s paps do grow 
great, do hold and gather milk, and also those places that are 
above their hips, in which the young fruit would remain. 
Likewise men’s breasts and shoulders, which then can bear 
great and heavy burdens; also their stones in which their seed 
may increase and abide, and in their privy members, to let 
out the seed with ease. Further all the body is made bigger 
and dilated, as the alteration and change of every part doth 
testify, and the harshness of the voice and hoarseness; for the 
rough artery, the wind pipe, being made wide in the beginning, 
and the exterior and outward part being unequal to 
the throat, the air going out the rough, unequal and uneven 
pipe doth then become unequal and sharp, and after, hoarse, 
something like unto the voice of a goat, wherefore it has its 
name called Bronchus. The same doth also happen to them 
unto whose rough artery distillation doth follow; it happens 
by reason of the drooping humidity that a slight small skin 
filled unequally causes the uneven going forth of the spirit 
266 



The Works of Aristotle 

and air. Understand, that the windpipe of goats is such by 
reason of the abundance of humidity. The like doth happen 
unto all such as nature hath given a rough artery, as unto 
cranes. After the age of fourteen they leave off that voice, 
because the artery is made wider and reacheth its natural 
evenness and quality. 

Q. Why do hard dens, hollow and high places, send back 
the likeness and sound of the voice? A. Because that in such 
places also by reflection do return back the image of a sound, 
for the voice doth beat the air, and the air the place, which 
the more it is beaten the more it doth bear, and therefore 
doth cause the more vehement sound of the voice; moist 
places, and as it were, soft, yielding to the stroke, and dissolving 
it, give no sound again; for according to the quantity 
of the stroke, the quality and quantity of the voice is given, 
which is called an echo. Some do idly fable that she is a 
goddess; some say that Pan was in love with her, which without 
doubt is false. He was some wise man, who did first 
desire to search out the cause of the voice, and as they who 
love, and cannot enjoy that love, are grieved, so in like manner 
was he very sorry until he found out the solution of that 
cause; as Endymion also, who first found out the course of 
the moon, watching all night, and observing her course, and 
searching her motion, did sleep in the daytime, and that she 
came to him when he was asleep, because she did give the 
philosopher the solution of the course herself. They say also 
that he was a shepherd, because that in the desert and high 
places, he did mark the course of the moon. And they gave 
him also the pipe because that the high places are blown 
with wind, or else because he sought out the consonancy of 
figures. Prometheus also, being a wise man, sought the course 
of the star, which is called the eagle in the firmament, his 
nature and place; and when he was, as it were, wasted with 
the desire of learning, then at last he rested, when Hercules 
did resolve unto him all doubts with his wisdom. 

Q. Why do not swine cry when they are carried with their 
snouts upwards? A. Because that of all other beasts they bend 
more to the earth. They delight in filth, and that they seek, 
and therefore in the sudden change of their face, they be as it 
were strangers, and being amazed with so much light do keep 
267 



The Works of Aristotle 

that silence; some say the windpipe doth close together by 
reason of the straitness of it. 

Q. Why do swine delight in dirt? A. As physicians do say, 
they are naturally delighted with it, because they have a great 
liver, in which desire it, as Aristotle saith, the wideness of 
their snout is the case, for he that hath smelling which doth 
dissolve itself, and as it were strive with stench. 
Q. Why do many beasts when they see their friends, and a 
lion and a bull beat their sides when they are angry? A. Because 
they have the marrow of their backs reaching to the 
tail, which hath the force of motion in it, the imagination 
acknowledging that which is known to them, as it were with 
the hand, as happens to men, doth force them to move their 
tails. This doth manifestly show some secret force to be within 
them, which doth acknowledge what they ought. In the anger 
of lions and bulls, nature doth consent to the mind, and 
causeth it to be greatly moved, as men do sometimes when 
they are angry, beating their hands on other parts; when the 
mind cannot be revenged on that which doth hurt, it presently 
seeks out some other source, and cures the malady with 
a stroke or blow. 

Q. How come steel glasses to be better for the sight than any 
other kind? A. Because steel is hard, and doth present unto 
us more substantially the air that receiveth the light. 
Q. How doth love show its greater force by making the fool 
to become wise, or the wise to become a fool? A. In attributing 
wisdom to him that has it not; for it is harder to build 
than to pull down; and ordinarily love and folly are but an 
alteration of the mind. 
Q. How comes much labour and fatigue to be bad for the 
sight? A. Because it dries the blood too much. 
Q. Why is goat’s milk reckoned best for the stomach? A. 
Because it is thick, not slimy, and they feed on wood and 
boughs rather than on grass. 
Q. Why do grief and vexation bring grey hairs? A. Because 
268 



The Works of Aristotle 

they dry, which bringeth on greyness. 

Q. How come those to have most mercy who have the thickest 
blood? A. Because the blood which is fat and thick makes 
the spirits firm and constant, wherein consists the force of 
all creatures. 
Q. Whether it is hardest, to obtain a person’s love, or to keep 
it when obtained? A. It is hardest to keep it, by reason of the 
inconstancy of man, who is quickly angry, and soon weary 
of a thing; hard to be gained and slippery to keep. 
Q. Why do serpents shun the herb rue? A. Because they are 
cold, dry and full of sinews, and that herb is of a contrary 
nature. 
Q. Why is a capon better to eat than a cock? A. Because a 
capon loses not his moisture by treading of the hens. 
Q. Why is our smell less in winter than in summer? A. Because 
the air is thick, and less moveable. 
Q. Why does hair burn so quickly? A. Because it is dry and 
cold. 
Q. Why is love compared to a labyrinth? A. Because the 
entry and coming in is easy, and the going out almost impossible 
or hard. 
269 



The Works of Aristotle 

PART IV 


DISPLAYING THE SECRETS OF NATURE 
RELATING TO PHYSIOGNOMY 


CHAPTER I 


SECTION 1.—Of Physiognomy, showing what it is, and 
whence it is derived. 

PHYSIOGNOMY is an ingenious science, or knowledge of nature, 
by which the inclinations and dispositions of every creature 
are understood, and because some of the members are 
uncompounded, and entire of themselves, as the tongue, the 
heart, etc., and some are of a mixed nature, as the eyes, the 
nose and others, we therefore say that there are signs which 
agree and live together, which inform a wise man how to make 
his judgment before he be too rash to deliver it to the world. 

Nor is it to be esteemed a foolish or idle art, seeing it is 
derived from the superior bodies; for there is no part of the 
face of man but what is under the peculiar influence or gov


ernment, not only of the seven planets but also of the twelve 
signs of Zodiac; and the dispositions, vices, virtues and fatality, 
either of a man or woman are plainly foretold, if the 
person pretending to the knowledge thereof be an artist, 
which, that my readers may hereby attain it I shall set these 
things in a clearer light. 

The reader should remember that the forehead is governed 
by Mars; the right eye is under the domination of Sol; the 
left is ruled by the Moon; the right ear is under Jupiter; the 
left, Saturn, the rule of the nose is claimed by Venus, which, 
by the way, is one reason that in all unlawful venereal encounters, 
the nose is too subject to bear the scars that are 
gotten in those wars; and nimble Mercury, the significator 
of eloquence claims the dominion of the mouth, and that 
very justly. 

Thus have the seven planets divided the face among them, 
but not with so absolute a way but that the twelve signs of 
the Zodiac do also come in with a part (see the engraving) 
and therefore the sign Cancer presides in the upper part of 
the forehead, and Leo attends upon the right eyebrow, as 
Saggittarius does upon the right eye, and Libra upon the 

270 



The Works of Aristotle 

right ear, upon the left eyebrow you will find Aquarius; and 
Gemini and Aries taking care of the left ear; Taurus rules in 
the middle of the forehead, and Capricorn the chin; Scorpio 
takes upon him the protection of the nose; Virgo claims the 
precedence of the right cheek, Pisces the left. And thus the 
face of man is cantoned out amongst the signs and planets; 
which being carefully attended to, will sufficiently inform 
the artist how to pass a judgment. For according to the sign 
or planet ruling so also is the judgment to be of the part 
ruled, which all those that have understanding know easily 
how to apply. 

In the judgment that is to be made from physiognomy, 
there is a great difference betwixt a man and a woman; the 
reason is, because in respect of the whole composition men 
more fully comprehend it than women do, as may evidently 
appear by the manner and method we shall give. Wherefore 
the judgments which we shall pass in every chapter do properly 
concern a man, as comprehending the whole species, 
and but improperly the woman, as being but a part thereof, 
and derived from the man, and therefore, whoever is called 
to give judgment on such a face, ought to be wary about all 

the lines and marks that belong to it, respect being also had 
to the sex, for when we behold a man whose face is like unto 
a woman’s and we pass a judgment upon it, having diligently 
observed it, and not on the face only, but on other parts of 
the body, as hands, etc., in like manner we also behold the 
face of a woman, who in respect to her flesh and blood is like 
unto a man, and in the disposure also of the greatest part of 
the body. But does physiognomy give the same judgment on 
her, as it does of a man that is like unto her? By no means, 
but far otherwise, in regard that the conception of the woman 
is much different from that of a man, even in those respects 
which are said to be common. Now in those common respects 
two parts are attributed to a man, and a third part to a 
woman. 

Wherefore it being our intention to give you an exact account, 
according to the rule of physiognomy of all and every 
part of the members of the body, we will begin with the 
head, as it hath relation only to man and woman, and not to 
any other creature, that the work may be more obvious to 
every reader. 

271 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER II 

Of the Judgment of Physiognomy 

HAIR THAT HANGS DOWN without curling, if it be of a fair 
complexion, thin and soft withal, signifies a man to be naturally 
faint-hearted, and of a weak body, but of a quiet and 
harmless disposition. Hair that is big, and thick and short 
withal, denotes a man to be of a strong constitution, secure, 
bold, deceitful and for the most part, unquiet and vain, lusting 
after beauty, and more foolish than wise, though fortune 
may favour him. He whose hair is partly curled and partly 
hanging down, is commonly wise or a very great fool, or else 
as very a knave as he is a fool. He whose hair grows thick on 
his temples and his brow, one may certainly at first sight 
conclude that such a man is by nature simple, vain, luxurious, 
lustful, credulous, clownish in his speech and conversation 
and dull in his apprehension. He whose hair not only 
curls very much, but bushes out, and stands on end, if the 
hair be white or of a yellowish colour, he is by nature proud 
and bold, dull of apprehension, soon angry, and a lover of 

venery, and given to lying, malicious and ready to do any 
mischief. He whose hair arises in the corners of the temples, 
and is gross and rough withal, is a man highly conceited of 
himself, inclined to malice, but cunningly conceals it, is very 
courtly and a lover of new fashions. He who hath much hair, 
that is to say, whose hair is thick all over his head, is naturally 
vain and very luxurious, of a good digestion, easy of 
belief, and slow of performance, of a weak memory and for 
the most part unfortunate. He whose hair is of a reddish 
complexion, is for the most part, if not always, proud, deceitful, 
detracting and full of envy. He whose hair is extraordinarily 
fair, is for the most part a man fit for the most praiseworthy 
enterprises, a lover of honour, and much more inclined 
to do good than evil; laborious and careful to perform 
whatsoever is committed to his care, secret in carrying on 
any business, and fortunate. Hair of a yellowish colour shows 
a man to be good conditioned, and willing to do anything, 
fearful, shamefaced and weak of body, but strong in the abilities 
of the mind, and more apt to remember, than to avenge 
an injury. He whose hair is of a brownish colour, and curled 
not too much nor too little, is a well-disposed man, inclined 

272 



The Works of Aristotle 

to that which is good, a lover of peace, cleanliness and good 
manners. He whose hair turns grey or hoary in the time of 
his youth, is generally given to women, vain, false, unstable, 
and talkative. [Note. That whatever signification the hair has 
in men, it has the same in women also.] 

The forehead that riseth in a round, signifies a man liberally 
merry, of a good understanding, and generally inclined 
to virtue. He whose forehead is fleshy, and the bone of the 
brow jutting out, and without wrinkles, is a man much inclined 
to suits of law, contentious, vain, deceitful, and addicted 
to follow ill courses. He whose forehead is very low 
and little, is of a good understanding, magnanimous, but 
extremely bold and confident, and a great pretender to love 
and honour. He whose forehead seems sharp, and pointed 
up in the corners of his temples, so that the bone seems to 
jut forth a little, is a man naturally weak and fickle, and 
weak in the intellectuals. He whose brow upon the temples 
is full of flesh, is a man of a great spirit, proud, watchful and 
of a gross understanding. He whose brow is full of wrinkles, 
and has as it were a seam coming down the middle of the 
forehead, so that a man may think he has two foreheads, is 

one that is of a great spirit, a great wit, void of deceit, and yet 
of a hard fortune. He who has a full, large forehead, and a 
little round withal, destitute of hair, or at least that has little 
on it is bold, malicious, full of choler and apt to transgress 
beyond all bounds, and yet of a good wit and very apprehensive. 
He whose forehead is long and high and jutting forth, 
and whose face is figured, almost sharp and peaked towards 
the chin, is one reasonably honest, but weak and simple, and 
of a hard fortune. 

Those eyebrows that are much arched, whether in man or 
woman, and which by frequent motion elevate themselves, 
show the person to be proud, high-spirited, vain-glorious, 
bold and threatening, a lover of beauty, and indifferently 
inclined to either good or evil. He whose eyelids bend down 
when he speaks to another or when he looks upon him, and 
who has a kind of skulking look, is by nature a penurious 
wretch, close in all his actions, of a very few words, but full 
of malice in his heart. He whose eyebrows are thick, and 
have but little hair upon them, is but weak in his intellectuals, 
and too credulous, very sincere, sociable, and desirous of 
good company. He whose eyebrows are folded, and the hair 

273 



The Works of Aristotle 

thick and bending downwards, is one that is clownish and 
unlearned, heavy, suspicious, miserable, envious, and one that 
will cheat and cozen you if he can. He whose eyebrows have 
but short hair and of a whitish colour is fearful and very easy 
of belief, and apt to undertake anything. Those, on the other 
side, whose eyebrows are black, and the hair of them thin, 
will do nothing without great consideration, and are bold 
and confident of the performance of what they undertake; 
neither are they apt to believe anything without reason for 
so doing. 

If the space between the eyebrows be of more than the 
ordinary distance, it shows the person to be hard-hearted, 
envious, close, cunning, apprehensive, greedy of novelties, 
of a vain fortune, addicted to cruelty more than love. But 
those men whose eyebrows are at a lesser distance from each 
other, are for the most part of a dull understanding; yet subtle 
enough in their dealings, and of an uncommon boldness, 
which is often attended with great felicity; but that which is 
most commendable in them is, that they are most sure and 
constant in their friendship. 

Great and full eyes in either man or woman, show the per


son to be for the most part slothful, bold, envious, a bad 
concealer of secrets, miserable, vain, given to lying, and yet a 
bad memory, slow in invention, weak in his intellectuals, 
and yet very much conceited of that little knack of wisdom 
he thinks himself master of. He whose eyes are hollow in his 
head, and therefore discerns well at a great distance, is one 
that is suspicious, malicious, furious, perverse in his conversation, 
of an extraordinary memory, bold, cruel, and false, 
both in words and deeds, threatening, vicious, luxurious, 
proud, envious and treacherous; but he whose eyes are, as it 
were, starting out of his head, is a simple, foolish person, 
shameless, very fertile and easy to be persuaded either to vice 
or virtue. He who looks studiously and acutely, with his eyes 
and eyelids downwards, denotes thereby to be of a malicious 
nature, very treacherous, false, unfaithful, envious, miserable, 
impious towards God, and dishonest towards men. He 
whose eyes are small and conveniently round, is bashful and 
weak, very credulous, liberal to others, and even in his conversation. 
He whose eyes look asquint, is thereby denoted to 
be a deceitful person, unjust, envious, furious, a great liar, 
and as the effect of all that is miserable. He who hath a wan


274 



The Works of Aristotle 

dering eye and which is rolling up and down, is for the most 
part a vain, simple, deceitful, lustful, treacherous, or high-
minded man, an admirer of the fair sex, and one easy to be 
persuaded to virtue or vice. He or she whose eyes are twinkling, 
and which move forward or backward, show the person 
to be luxurious, unfaithful and treacherous, presumptuous, 
and hard to believe anything that is spoken. If a person 
has any greenness mingled with the white of his eye, such is 
commonly silly, and often very false, vain and deceitful, unkind 
to his friends, a great concealer of his own secrets, and 
very choleric. Those whose eyes are every way rolling up and 
down, or they who seldom move their eyes, and when they 
do, as it were, draw their eyes inwardly and accurately fasten 
them upon some object, such are by their inclinations very 
malicious, vain-glorious, slothful, unfaithful, envious, false 
and contentious. They whose eyes are addicted to bloodshot, 
are naturally proud, disdainful, cruel, without shame, 
perfidious and much inclined to superstition. But he whose 
eyes are neither too little nor too big, and inclined to black, 
do signify a man mild, peaceable, honest, witty, and of a 
good understanding; and one that, when need requires, will 

be serviceable to his friends. 

A long and thin nose, denotes a man bold, furious, angry, 
vain, easy to be persuaded either to good or evil, weak and 
credulous. A long nose extended, the tip of it bending downwards, 
shows the person to be wise, discreet, secret and officious, 
honest, faithful and one that will not be over-reached 
in bargaining. 

A bottle-nose is what denotes a man to be impetuous in 
the obtaining of his desires, also a vain, false, luxurious, weak 
and uncertain man; apt to believe and easy to be persuaded. 
A broad nose in the middle, and less towards the end, denotes 
a vain, talkative person, a liar, and one of hard fortune. 
He who hath a long and great nose is an admirer of the fair 
sex, and well accomplished for the wars of Venus, but ignorant 
of the knowledge of anything that is good, extremely 
addicted to vice; assiduous in the obtaining what he desires, 
and very secret in the prosecution of it; and though very 
ignorant, would fain be thought very knowing. 

A nose very sharp on the tip of it, and neither too long nor 
too short, too thick nor too thin, denotes the person, if a 
man, to be of a fretful disposition, always pining and pee


275 



The Works of Aristotle 

vish; and if a woman, a scold, or contentious, wedded to her 
own humours, of a morose and dogged carriage, and if married, 
a plague to her husband. A nose very round at the end 
of it, and having but little nostrils, shows the person to be 
munificent and liberal, true to his trust, but withal, very 
proud, credulous and vain. A nose very long and thin at the 
end of it, and something round, withal, signifies one bold in 
his discourse, honest in his dealings, patient in receiving, 
and slow in offering injuries, but yet privately malicious. He 
whose nose is naturally more red than any other part of his 
face, is thereby denoted to be covetous, impious, luxurious, 
and an enemy to goodness. A nose that turns up again, and 
is long and full at the tip of it, shows the person that has it to 
be bold, proud, covetous, envious, luxurious, a liar and deceiver, 
vain, glorious, unfortunate and contentious. He whose 
nose riseth high in the middle, is prudent and polite, and of 
great courage, honourable in his actions, and true to his word. 
A nose big at the end shows a person to be of a peaceable 
disposition, industrious and faithful, and of a good understanding. 
A very wide nose, with wide nostrils, denotes a 
man dull of apprehension, and inclined more to simplicity 

than wisdom, and withal vain, contentious and a liar. 

When the nostrils are close and thin, they denote a man to 
have but little testicles, and to be very desirous of the enjoyment 
of women, but modest in his conversation. But he whose 
nostrils are great and wide, is usually well hung and lustful; 
but withal of an envious, bold and treacherous disposition 
and though dull of understanding, yet confident enough. 

A great and wide mouth shows a man to be bold, warlike, 
shameless and stout, a great liar and as great a talker, also a 
great eater, but as to his intellectuals, he is very dull, being 
for the most part very simple. 

A little mouth shows the person to be of a quiet and pacific 
temper, somewhat reticent, but faithful, secret, modest, 
bountiful, and but a little eater. 

He whose mouth smells of a bad breath, is one of a corrupted 
liver and lungs, is oftentimes vain, wanton, deceitful, 
of indifferent intellect, envious, covetous, and a promise-
breaker. He that has a sweet breath, is the contrary. 

The lips, when they are very big and blubbering, show a 
person to be credulous, foolish, dull and stupid, and apt to 
be enticed to anything. Lips of a different size denote a per


276 



The Works of Aristotle 

son to be discreet, secret in all things, judicious and of a 
good wit, but somewhat hasty. To have lips, well coloured 
and more thin than thick, shows a person to be good-
humoured in all things and more easily persuaded to good 
than evil. To have one lip bigger than the other, shows a 
variety of fortunes, and denotes the party to be of a dull, 
sluggish temper, but of a very indifferent understanding, as 
being much addicted to folly. 

When the teeth are small, and but weak in performing 
their office, and especially if they are short and few, though 
they show the person to be of a weak constitution, yet they 
denote him to be of a meek disposition, honest, faithful and 
secret in whatsoever he is intrusted with. To have some teeth 
longer and shorter than others, denotes a person to be of a 
good apprehension, but bold, disdainful, envious and proud. 
To have the teeth very long, and growing sharp towards the 
end, if they are long in chewing, and thin, denotes the person 
to be envious, gluttonous, bold, shameless, unfaithful 
and suspicious. When the teeth look very brown or yellowish, 
whether they be long or short, it shows the person to be 
of a suspicious temper, envious, deceitful and turbulent. To 

have teeth strong and close together, shows the person to be 
of a long life, a desirer of novelties, and things that are fair 
and beautiful, but of a high spirit, and one that will have his 
humour in all things; he loves to hear news, and to repeat it 
afterwards, and is apt to entertain anything on his behalf. To 
have teeth thin and weak, shows a weak, feeble man, and 
one of a short life, and of a weak apprehension; but chaste, 
shame-faced, tractable and honest. 

A tongue to be too swift of speech shows a man to be downright 
foolish, or at best but a very vain wit. A stammering 
tongue, or one that stumbles in the mouth, signifies a man 
of a weak understanding, and of a wavering mind, quickly 
in a rage, and soon pacified. A very thick and rough tongue 
denotes a man to be apprehensive, subtle and full of compliments, 
yet vain and deceitful, treacherous, and prone to impiety. 
A thin tongue shows a man of wisdom and sound judgment, 
very ingenious and of an affable disposition, yet somewhat 
timorous and too credulous. 

A great and full voice in either sex shows them to be of a 
great spirit, confident, proud and wilful. A faint and weak 
voice, attended with but little breath, shows a person to be 

277 



The Works of Aristotle 

of good understanding, a nimble fancy, a little eater, but weak 
of body, and of a timorous disposition. A loud and shrill 
voice, which sounds clearly denotes a person provident, sagacious, 
true and ingenious, but withal capricious, vain, glorious 
and too credulous. A strong voice when a man sings 
denotes him to be of a strong constitution, and of a good 
understanding, a nimble fancy, a little eater, but weak of body, 
and of a timorous disposition. 

A strong voice when a man sings, denotes him to be of a 
strong constitution, and of a good understanding, neither 
too penurious nor too prodigal, also ingenious and an admirer 
of the fair sex. A weak and trembling voice shows the 
owner of it to be envious, suspicious, slow in business, feeble 
and fearful. A loud, shrill and unpleasant voice, signifies one 
bold and valiant, but quarrelsome and injurious and altogether 
wedded to his own humours, and governed by his 
own counsels. A rough and hoarse voice, whether in speaking 
or singing, declares one to be a dull and heavy person, of 
much guts and little brains. A full and yet mild voice, and 
pleasing to the hearer, shows the person to be of a quiet and 
peaceable disposition (which is a great virtue and rare to be 

found in a woman), and also very thrifty and secret, not 
prone to anger, but of a yielding temper. A voice beginning 
low or in the bass, and ending high in the treble, denotes a 
person to be violent, angry, bold and secure. 

A thick and full chin abounding with too much flesh, shows 
a man inclined to peace, honest and true to his trust, but 
slow in invention, and easy to be drawn either to good or 
evil. A peaked chin and reasonably full of flesh, shows a person 
to be of a good understanding, a high spirit and laudable 
conversation. A double chin shows a peaceable disposition, 
but dull of apprehension, vain, credulous, a great supplanter, 
and secret in all his actions. A crooked chin, bending upwards, 
and peaked for want of flesh, is by the rules of physiognomy, 
according to nature, a very bad man, being proud, 
imprudent, envious, threatening, deceitful, prone to anger 
and treachery, and a great thief. 

The hair of young men usually begins to grow down upon 
their chins at fifteen years of age, and sometimes sooner. These 
hairs proceed from the superfluity of heat, the fumes whereof 
ascend to their chin, like smoke to the funnel of a chimney; 
and because it cannot find an open passage by which it may 

278 



The Works of Aristotle 

ascend higher, it vents itself forth in the hairs which are called 
the beard. There are very few, or almost no women at all, 
that have hairs on their cheeks; and the reason is, that those 
humours which cause hair to grow on the cheeks of a man 
are by a woman evacuated in the monthly courses, which 
they have more or less, according to the heat or coldness of 
their constitution, and the age and motion of the moon, of 
which we have spoken at large in the first part of this book. 
Yet sometimes women of a hot constitution have hair to be 
seen on their cheeks, but more commonly on their lips, or 
near their mouths, where the heat most aboundeth. And 
where this happens, such women are much addicted to the 
company of men, and of a strong and manly constitution. A 
woman who hath little hair on her cheeks, or about her mouth 
and lips, is of a good complexion, weak constitution, shamefaced, 
mild and obedient, whereas a woman of a more hot 
constitution is quite otherwise. But in a man, a beard well 
composed and thick of hair, signifies a man of good nature, 
honest, loving, sociable and full of humanity; on the contrary, 
he that hath but a little beard, is for the most part 
proud, pining, peevish and unsociable. They who have no 

beards, have always shrill and a strange kind of squeaking 
voices, and are of a weak constitution, which is apparent in 
the case of eunuchs, who, after they are deprived of their 
virility are transformed from the nature of men into the condition 
of women. 

Great and thick ears are a certain sign of a foolish person, 
or a bad memory and worse understanding. But small and 
thin ears show a person to be of a good wit, grave, sweet, 
thrifty, modest, resolute, of a good memory, and one willing 
to serve his friend. He whose ears are longer than ordinary, is 
thereby signified to be a bold man, uncivil, vain, foolish, 
serviceable to another more than to himself, and a man of 
small industry, but of a great stomach. 

A face apt to sweat on every motion, shows a person to be 
of a very hot constitution, vain and luxurious, of a good 
stomach, but of a bad understanding, and a worse conversation. 
A very fleshy face shows the person to be of a fearful 
disposition, but a merry heart, and withal bountiful and discreet, 
easy to be entreated, and apt to believe everything. A 
lean face, by the rules of physiognomy, denotes the person 
to be of a good understanding, but somewhat capricious and 

279 



The Works of Aristotle 

disdainful in his conversation. A little and round face, shows 
a person to be simple, very fearful, of a bad memory, and a 
clownish disposition. A plump face, full of carbuncles, shows 
a man to be a great drinker of wine, vain, daring, and soon 
intoxicated. A face red or high coloured, shows a man much 
inclined to choler, and one that will be soon angry and not 
easily pacified. A long and lean face, shows a man to be both 
bold, injurious and deceitful. A face every way of a due proportion, 
denotes an ingenious person, one fit for anything 
and very much inclined to what is good. One of a broad, 
full, fat face is, by the rules of physiognomy, of a dull, lumpish, 
heavy constitution, and that for one virtue has three vices. A 
plain, flat face, without any rising shows a person to be very 
wise, loving and courtly in his carriage, faithful to his friend 
and patient in adversity. A face sinking down a little, with 
crosses in it, inclining to leanness, denotes a person to be 
very laborious, but envious, deceitful, false, quarrelsome, vain 
and silly, and of a dull and clownish behaviour. A face of a 
handsome proportion, and more inclining to fat than lean, 
shows a person just in his actions, true to his word, civil, and 
respectful in his behaviour, of an indifferent understanding, 

and of an extraordinary memory. A crooked face, long and 
lean, denotes a man endued with as bad qualities as the face 
is with ill features. A face broad about the brows, and sharper 
and less as it grows towards the chin, shows a man simple 
and foolish in managing his affairs, vain in his discourse, 
envious in his nature, deceitful, quarrelsome and rude in his 
conversation. A face well-coloured, full of good features, and 
of an exact symmetry, and a just proportion in all its parts, 
and which is delightful to look upon, is commonly the index 
of a fairer mind and shows a person to be well disposed; 
but withal declares that virtue is not so impregnably seated 
there, but that by strong temptations (especially by the fair 
sex) it may be supplanted and overcome by vice. A pale complexion, 
shows the person not only to be fickle, but very 
malicious, treacherous, false, proud, presumptuous, and extremely 
unfaithful. A face well-coloured, shows the person 
to be of a praiseworthy disposition and a sound complexion, 
easy of belief, and respectful to his friend, ready to do a courtesy, 
and very easy to be drawn to anything. 

A great head, and round, withal, denotes the person to be 
secret, and of great application in carrying on business, and 

280 



The Works of Aristotle 

also ingenious and of a large imaginative faculty and invention; 
and likewise laborious, constant and honest. The head 
whose gullet stands forth and inclines towards the earth, signifies 
a person thrifty, wise, peaceable, secret, of a retired 
temper, and constant in the management of his affairs. A 
long head and face, and great, withal, denotes a vain, foolish, 
idle and weak person, credulous and very envious. To 
have one’s head always shaking and moving from side to side, 
denotes a shallow, weak person, unstable in all his actions, 
given to lying, a great deceiver, a great talker, and prodigal in 
all his fortunes. A big head and broad face, shows a man to 
be very courageous, a great hunter after women, very suspicious, 
bold and shameless. He who hath a very big head, but 
not so proportionate as it ought to be to the body, if he hath 
a short neck and crooked gullet is generally a man of apprehension, 
wise, secret, ingenious, of sound judgment, faithful, 
true and courteous to all. He who hath a little head, and 
long, slender throat, is for the most part a man very weak, 
yet apt to learn, but unfortunate in his actions. And so much 
shall suffice with respect to judgment from the head and 
face. 

CHAPTER III 


Of Judgments drawn from several other parts of 
Man’s Body 

IN THE BODY OF MAN the head and feet are the principal parts, 
being the index which heaven has laid open to every one’s 
view to make a judgment therefrom, therefore I have been the 
larger in my judgment from the several parts thereof. But as to 
the other parts, I shall be much more brief as not being so 
obvious to the eyes of men; yet I would proceed in order. 

The throat, if it be white, whether it be fat or lean, shows 
a man to be vain-glorious, timorous, wanton, and very much 
subject to choler. If the throat be so thin and lean that the 
veins appear, it shows a man to be weak, slow, and a dull and 
heavy constitution. 

A long neck shows one to have a long and slender foot, and 
that the person is stiff and inflexible either to good or evil. A 
short neck shows one to be witty and ingenious, but deceitful 
and inconstant, well skilled in the use of arms, and yet cares 
not to use them, but is a great lover of peace and quietness. 

281 



The Works of Aristotle 

A lean shoulder bone, signifies a man to be weak, timorous, 
peaceful, not laborious, and yet fit for any employment. 
He whose shoulder bones are of a great bigness is commonly, 
by the rule of physiognomy, a strong man, faithful 
but unfortunate; somewhat dull of understanding, very laborious, 
a great eater and drinker, and one equally contented 
in all conditions. He whose shoulder bone seems to be 
smooth, is by the rule of nature, modest in his look, and 
temperate in all his actions, both at bed and board. He whose 
shoulder bone bends, and is crooked inwardly, is commonly 
a dull person and deceitful. 

Long arms, hanging down and touching the knees, though 
such arms are rarely seen, denotes a man liberal, but withal 
vain-glorious, proud and inconstant. He whose arms are very 
short in respect to the stature of his body, is thereby signified 
to be a man of high and gallant spirit, of a graceful temper, 
bold and warlike. He whose arms are full of bones, sinews 
and flesh, is a great desirer of novelties and beauties, and one 
that is very credulous and apt to believe anything. He whose 
arms are very hairy, whether they be lean or fat, is for the 
most part a luxurious person, weak in body and mind, very 

suspicious and malicious withal. He whose arms have no 
hair on them at all, is of a weak judgment, very angry, vain, 
wanton, credulous, easily deceived himself, yet a great deceiver 
of others, no fighter, and very apt to betray his dearest 
friends. 

282 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER IV 

Of Palmistry, showing the various Judgments 
drawn from the Hand 

BEING ENGAGED in this fourth part to show what judgment 
may be drawn, according to physiognomy, from the several 
parts of the body, and coming in order to speak of the hands, 
it has put me under the necessity of saying something about 
palmistry, which is a judgment made of the conditions, inclinations, 
and fortunes of men and women, from the various 
lines and characters nature has imprinted in their hands, 
which are almost as serious as the hands that have them. 

The reader should remember that one of the lines of the 
hand, and which indeed is reckoned the principal, is called 
the line of life; this line encloses the thumb, separating it 
from the hollow of the hand. The next to it, which is called 
the natural line, takes its beginning from the rising of the 
forefinger, near the line of life, and reaches to the table line, 
and generally makes a triangle. The table line, commonly 
called the line of fortune, begins under the little finger, and 

ends near the middle finger. The girdle of Venus, which is 
another line so called begins near the first joint of the little 
finger, and ends between the fore-finger and the middle finger. 
The line of death is that which plainly appears in a counter 
line to that of life, and is called the sister line, ending usually 
as the other ends; for when the line of life is ended, death 
comes, and it can go no farther. There are lines in the fleshy 
parts, as in the ball of the thumb, which is called the mount 
of Venus; under each of the fingers are also mounts, which 
are governed by several planets; and the hollow of the hand 
is called the plain of Mars. 

I proceed to give judgment from these several lines:—In 
palmistry, the left hand is chiefly to be regarded, because 
therein the lines are most visible, and have the strictest communication 
with the heart and brain. In the next place, observe 
the line of life, and if it be fair, extended to its full 
length, and not broken with an intermixture of cross lines, it 
shows long life and health, and it is the same if a double line 
appears, as there sometimes does. When the stars appear in 
this line, it is a signification of great losses and calamities; if 
on it there be the figures of two O’s or a Q, it threatens the 

283 



The Works of Aristotle 

person with blindness; if it wraps itself about the table line, 
then does it promise wealth and honour to be attended by 
prudence and industry. If the line be cut and jagged at the 
upper end, it denotes much sickness; if this line be cut by 
any lines coming from the mount of Venus, it declares the 
person to be unfortunate in love and business also, and threatens 
him with sudden death. A cross below the line of life and 
the table line, shows the person to be very liberal and charitable, 
one of a noble spirit. Let us now see the signification 
of the table line. 

The table line, when broad and of a lively colour, shows a 
healthful constitution, and a quiet contented mind, and a 
courageous spirit, but if it has crosses towards the little finger, 
it threatens the party with much affliction by sickness. If 
the line be double, or divided into three parts at any of the 
extremities, it shows the person to be of a generous temper, 
and of a good fortune to support it; but if this line be forked 
at the end, it threatens the person shall suffer by jealousies 
and doubts, and loss of riches gotten by deceit. If three points 
such as these 

* * 
* 


are found in it, they denote the person prudent and liberal, a 
lover of learning, and of a good temper, if it spreads towards 
the fore and middle finger and ends blunt, it denotes preferment. 
Let us now see what is signified by the middle line. 
This line has in it oftentimes (for there is scarce a hand in 
which it varies not) divers very significant characters. Many 
small lines between this and the table line threaten the party 
with sickness, and also gives him hopes of recovery. A half 
cross branching into this line, declares the person shall have 
honour, riches, and good success in all his undertakings. A 
half moon denotes cold and watery distempers; but a sun or 
star upon this line, denotes prosperity and riches; this line, 
double in a woman, shows she will have several husbands, 
but no children. 

The line of Venus, if it happens to be cut or divided near 
the forefinger, threatens ruin to the party, and that it shall 
befall him by means of lascivious women and bad company. 
Two crosses upon the line, one being on the forefinger and 
the other bending towards the little finger, show the party to 

284 



The Works of Aristotle 

be weak, and inclined to modesty and virtue, indeed it generally 
denotes modesty in women; and therefore those who 
desire such, usually choose them by this standard. 

The liver line, if it be straight and crossed by other lines, 
shows the person to be of a sound judgment, and a piercing 
understanding, but if it be winding, crooked and bending 
outward, it draws deceit and flattery, and the party is not to 
be trusted. If it makes a triangle or quadrangle, it shows the 
person to be of a noble descent, and ambitious of honour 
and promotion. If it happens that this line and the middle 
line begin near each other, it denotes a person to be weak in 
his judgment, if a man; but if a woman, in danger by hard 
labour. 

The plain of Mars being in the hollow of the hand, most 
of the lines pass through it, which renders it very significant. 
This plain being crooked and distorted, threatens the party 
to fall by his enemies. When the lines beginning at the wrist 
are long within the plain, reaching to the brawn of the hand, 
that shows the person to be much given to quarrelling, often 
in broils and of a hot and fiery spirit, by which he suffers 
much damage. If deep and long crosses be in the middle of 

the plain, it shows the party shall obtain honour by martial 
exploits; but if it be a woman, she shall have several husbands 
and easy labour with her children. 

The line of Death is fatal, when crosses or broken lines 
appear in it; for they threaten the person with sickness and a 
short life. A clouded moon appearing therein, threatens a 
child-bed woman with death. A bloody spot in the line, denotes 
a violent death. A star like a comet, threatens ruin by 
war, and death by pestilence. But if a bright sun appears 
therein, it promises long life and prosperity. 

As for the lines of the wrist being fair, they denote good 
fortune; but if crossed and broken, the contrary. 

285 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER V 


Judgments according to Physiognomy, drawn from 
the several parts of the Body, from the Hands to 
the Feet 

A LARGE AND FULL BREAST, shows a man valiant and courageous, 
but withal proud and hard to deal with, quickly angry, 
and very apprehensive of an injury; he whose breast is 
narrow, and which riseth a little in the middle of it, is, by the 
best rule of physiognomy, of a clear spirit, of a great understanding, 
good in counsel, very faithful, clean both in mind 
and body, yet as an enemy to this, he is soon angry, and 
inclined long to keep it. He whose breast is somewhat hairy, 
is very luxurious, and serviceable to another. He who hath 
no hair upon his breast, is a man weak by nature, of a slender 
capacity and very timorous, but of a laudable life and conversation, 
inclined to peace, and much retired to himself. 

The back of the chin bone, if the flesh be anything hairy 
and lean, and higher than any other part that is behind, signifies 
a man shameless, beastly and withal malicious. He 

whose back is large, big and fat, is thereby denoted to be a 
strong and stout man, but of a heavy disposition, vain, slow 
and full of deceit. 

He or she whose belly is soft over all the body, is weak, 
lustful, and fearful upon little or no occasion, of a good understanding, 
and an excellent invention, but little eaters, faithful, 
but of various fortune, and meet with more adversity 
than prosperity. He whose flesh is rough and hard, is a man 
of strong constitution and very bold, but vain, proud and of 
a cruel temper. A person whose skin is smooth, fat and white, 
is a person, curious, vain-glorious, timorous, shame-faced, 
malicious, false, and too wise to believe all he hears. 

A thigh, full of strong, bristly hair, and the hair inclined to 
curl, signifies one lustful, licentious, and fit for copulation. 
Thighs with but little hair, and those soft and slender, show 
the person to be reasonably chaste, and one that has no great 
desire to coition, and who will have but few children. 

The legs of both men and women have a fleshy substance 
behind, which are called calves, which nature hath given them 
(as in our book of living creatures we have observed), in lieu 
of those long tails which other creatures have pendant be


286 



The Works of Aristotle 

hind. Now a great calf, and he whose legs are of great bone, 
and hair withal, denotes the person to be strong, bold, secure, 
dull in understanding and slow in business, inclined to 
procreation, and for the most part fortunate in his undertakings. 
Little legs, and but little hair on them, show the 
person to be weak, fearful, of a quick understanding, and 
neither luxurious at bed nor board. He whose legs do much 
abound with hair, shows he has great store in another place, 
and that he is lustful and luxurious, strong, but unstable in 
his resolution, and abounding with ill humours. 

The feet of either men or women, if broad and thick with 
flesh, and long in figure, especially if the skin feels hard, they 
are by nature of a strong constitution, and gross nutriment, 
but of weak intellect, which renders the understanding vain. 
But feet that are thin and lean, and of a soft skin, show the 
person to be but weak of body, but of a strong understanding 
and an excellent wit. 

The soles of the feet do administer plain and evident signs, 
whereby the disposition and constitution of men and women 
may be known, as do the palms of their hands, as being full 
of lines, by which lines all the fortunes and misfortunes of 

men and women may be known, and their manners and 
inclinations made plainly to appear. But this in general we 
may take notice, as that many long lines and strokes do 
presage great affliction, and a very troublesome life, attended 
with much grief and toil, care, poverty, and misery; but short 
lines, if they are thick and full of cross lines, are yet worse in 
every degree. Those, the skin of whose soles is very thick and 
gross, are, for the most part, able, strong and venturous. 
Whereas, on the contrary, those the skin of whose soles of 
their feet is thin, are generally weak and timorous. 

I shall now, before I conclude (having given an account of 
what judgments may be made by observing the several parts 
of the body, from the crown of the head to the soles of the 
feet), give an account of what judgments may be drawn by 
the rule of physiognomy from things extraneous which are 
found upon many, and which indeed to them are parts of 
the body, but are so far from being necessary parts that they 
are the deformity and burden of it, and speak of the habits 
of the body, as they distinguish persons. 

287 



The Works of Aristotle 

Of Crooked and Deformed Persons 

A crooked breast and shoulder, or the exuberance of flesh in 
the body either of man or woman, signifies the person to be 
extremely parsimonious and ingenious, and of a great understanding, 
but very covetous and scraping after the things 
of the world, attended also with a very bad memory, being 
also very deceitful and malicious; they are seldom in a medium, 
but either virtuous or extremely vicious. But if the 
person deformed hath an excrescence on his breast instead 
of on the back, he is for the most part of a double heart, and 
very mischievous. 

Of the divers Manners of going, and particular Posture both 
of Men and Women 

He or she that goes slowly, making great steps as they go, are 
generally persons of bad memory, and dull of apprehension, 
given to loitering, and not apt to believe what is told them. 
He who goes apace, and makes short steps, is most success


ful in all his undertakings, swift in his imagination, and 
humble in the disposition of his affairs. He who makes wide 
and uneven steps, and sidelong withal, is one of a greedy, 
sordid nature, subtle, malicious, and willing to do evil. 

Of the Gait or Motion in Men and Women 

Every man hath a certain gait or motion, and so in like manner 
hath every woman; for a man to be shaking his head, or 
using any light motion with his hands or feet, whether he 
stands or sits, or speaks, is always accompanied with an extravagant 
motion, unnecessary, superfluous and unhandsome. 
Such a man, by the rule of physiognomy is vain, unwise, 
unchaste, a detractor, unstable and unfaithful. He or she 
whose motion is not much when discoursing with any one, 
is for the most part wise and well bred, and fit for any employment, 
ingenious and apprehensive, frugal, faithful and 
industrious in business. He whose posture is forwards and 
backwards, or, as it were, whisking up and down, mimical, is 
thereby denoted to be a vain, silly person, of a heavy and 

288 



The Works of Aristotle 

dull wit, and very malicious. He whose motion is lame and 
limping, or otherwise imperfect, or that counterfeits an imperfection 
is denoted to be envious, malicious, false and detracting. 


Judgment drawn from the Stature of Man 

Physiognomy draws several judgments also from the stature 
of man, which take as followeth; if a man be upright and 
straight, inclined rather to leanness than fat, it shows him to 
be bold, cruel, proud, clamorous, hard to please, and harder 
to be reconciled when displeased, very frugal, deceitful, and 
in many things malicious. To be of tall stature and corpulent 
with it, denotes him to be not only handsome but valiant 
also, but of no extraordinary understanding, and which is 
worst of all, ungrateful and trepanning. He who is extremely 
tall and very lean and thin is a projecting man, that designs 
no good to himself, and suspects every one to be as bad as 
himself, importunate to obtain what he desires, and extremely 
wedded to his own humour. He who is thick and short, is 

vain, envious, suspicious, and very shallow of apprehension, 
easy of belief, but very long before he will forget an injury. 
He who is lean and short but upright withal, is, by the rules 
of physiognomy, wise and ingenious, bold and confident, 
and of a good understanding, but of a deceitful heart. He 
who stoops as he goes, not so much by age as custom, is very 
laborious, a retainer of secrets, but very incredulous and not 
easy to believe every vain report he hears. He that goes with 
his belly stretching forth, is sociable, merry, and easy to be 
persuaded. 

289 



The Works of Aristotle 

CHAPTER VI 

Of the Power of the Celestial Bodies over Men and Women 

HAVING SPOKEN THUS LARGELY of Physiognomy, and the judgment 
given thereby concerning the dispositions and inclinations 
of men and women, it will be convenient here to show 
how all these things come to pass; and how it is that the 
secret inclinations and future fate of men and women may 
be known from the consideration of the several parts of the 
bodies. They arise from the power and dominion of superior 
powers to understand the twelve signs of the Zodiac, whose 
signs, characters and significations are as follows:— 

Aries, the Ram, which governs the head and face. 

Taurus, the Bull, which governs the neck. 

Gemini, the Twins, which governs the hands and arms. 

Cancer, the Crab, governs the breast and stomach. 

Leo, the Lion, governs the back and heart 

Virgo, the Virgin, governs the belly and bowels. 

Libra, the Balance, governs the veins and loins. 

Scorpio, the Scorpion, governs the secret parts. 

Sagittary, the Centaur, governs the thighs. 

Capricorn, the Goat, governs the knees. 

Aquarius, the Water-Bearer, governs the legs and ankles. 

Pisces, the Fish, governs the feet. 

It is here furthermore necessary to let the reader know, 
that the ancients have divided the celestial sphere into twelve 
parts, according to the number of these signs, which are 
termed houses; as in the first house, Aries, in the second 
Taurus, in the third Gemini, etc. And besides their assigning 
the twelve signs of the twelve houses, they allot to each house 
its proper business. 

To the first house they give the signification of life. 

The second house has the signification of wealth, 

substances, or riches. 

The third is the mansion of brethren. 

The fourth, the house of parentage. 

The fifth is the house of children. 

The sixth is the house of sickness or disease. 

The seventh is the house of wedlock, and also of enemies, 

290 



The Works of Aristotle 

because oftentimes a wife or husband proves the worst en


emy. 

The eighth is the house of death. 

The ninth is the house of religion. 

The tenth is the signification of honours. 

The eleventh of friendship. 

The twelfth is the house of affliction and woe. 

Now, astrologically speaking, a house is a certain place in 
the heaven or firmament, divided by certain degrees, through 
which the planets have their motion, and in which they have 
their residence and are situated. And these houses are divided 
by thirty degrees, for every sign has so many degrees. 
And these signs or houses are called the houses of such and 
such planets as make their residence therein, and are such as 
delight in them, and as they are deposited in such and such 
houses are said to be either dignified or debilitated. For 
though the planets in their several revolutions go through all 
the houses, yet there are some houses which they are more 
properly said to delight in. As for instance, Aries and Scorpio 
are the houses of Mars; Taurus and Libra of Venus; 
Gemini and Virgo of Mercury; Sagittarius and Pisces are the 

houses of Jupiter; Capricorn and Aquarius are the houses of 
Saturn; Leo is the house of the Sun; and Cancer is the house 
of the Moon. 

Now to sum up the whole, and show how this concerns 
Physiognomy, is this:—as the body of man, as we have shown, 
is not only governed by the signs and planets, but every part 
is appropriated to one or another of them, so according to 
the particular influence of each sign and planet, so governing 
is the disposition, inclination, and nature of the person 
governed. For such and such tokens and marks do show a 
person to be born under such and such a planet; so according 
to the nature, power and influences of the planets, is the 
judgment to be made of that person. By which the reader 
may see that the judgments drawn from physiognomy are 
grounded upon a certain verity. 

291 

Aristotle - Works 
[Translated under the editorship of W. D. Ross] 


Organon I – Categories 2 
Organon II - On Interpretation 47 
Organon III - Prior Analytics 81 
Organon IV - Posterior Analytics 221 
Organon V – Topics 326 
Organon VI - On Sophistical Refutations 533 

Physics 602 
On the Heavens 852 
On Generation and Corruption 952 
Meteorology 1 033 
On the Soul 1 159 
Parva Naturalia 1 256 
History of Animals 1 389 
On the Parts of Animals 1 791 
On the Motion of Animals 1 966 
On the Gait of Animals 1 984 
On the Generation of Animals 2 009 
Metaphysics 2 205 
Nicomachean Ethics 2 536 
Politics 2 788 
Athenian Constitution 3 050 
Rhetoric 3 132 
Poetics 3 308 


Aristotle – Categories 
[Translated by E. M. Edghill] 


Things are said to be named ‘equivocally’ when, though they 
have a common name, the definition corresponding with the 
name differs for each. Thus, a real man and a figure in a picture 
can both lay claim to the name ‘animal’; yet these are 
equivocally so named, for, though they have a common name, 
the definition corresponding with the name differs for each. For 
should any one define in what sense each is an animal, his 
definition in the one case will be appropriate to that case only. 

On the other hand, things are said to be named ‘univocally’ 
which have both the name and the definition answering to the 
name in common. A man and an ox are both ‘animal’, and these 
are univocally so named, inasmuch as not only the name, but 
also the definition, is the same in both cases: for if a man 
should state in what sense each is an animal, the statement in 
the one case would be identical with that in the other. 

Things are said to be named ‘derivatively’, which derive their 
name from some other name, but differ from it in termination. 
Thus the grammarian derives his name from the word 
‘grammar’, and the courageous man from the word ‘courage’. 


Forms of speech are either simple or composite. Examples of 
the latter are such expressions as ‘the man runs’, ‘the man 
wins’; of the former ‘man’, ‘ox’, ‘runs’, ‘wins’. 

Of things themselves some are predicable of a subject, and are 
never present in a subject. Thus ‘man’ is predicable of the 
individual man, and is never present in a subject. 

By being ‘present in a subject’ I do not mean present as parts 
are present in a whole, but being incapable of existence apart 
from the said subject. 

Some things, again, are present in a subject, but are never 
predicable of a subject. For instance, a certain point of 
grammatical knowledge is present in the mind, but is not 
predicable of any subject; or again, a certain whiteness may be 
present in the body (for colour requires a material basis), yet it 
is never predicable of anything. 

Other things, again, are both predicable of a subject and present 
in a subject. Thus while knowledge is present in the human 
mind, it is predicable of grammar. 

There is, lastly, a class of things which are neither present in a 
subject nor predicable of a subject, such as the individual man 
or the individual horse. But, to speak more generally, that which 
is individual and has the character of a unit is never predicable 
of a subject. Yet in some cases there is nothing to prevent such 
being present in a subject. Thus a certain point of grammatical 
knowledge is present in a subject. 


When one thing is predicated of another, all that which is 
predicable of the predicate will be predicable also of the subject. 
Thus, ‘man’ is predicated of the individual man; but ‘animal’ is 
predicated of ‘man’; it will, therefore, be predicable of the 
individual man also: for the individual man is both ‘man’ and 
‘animal’. 

If genera are different and co-ordinate, their differentiae are 
themselves different in kind. Take as an instance the genus 
‘animal’ and the genus ‘knowledge’. ‘With feet’, ‘two-footed’, 
‘winged’, ‘aquatic’, are differentiae of ‘animal’; the species of 
knowledge are not distinguished by the same differentiae. One 
species of knowledge does not differ from another in being 
‘two-footed’. 

But where one genus is subordinate to another, there is nothing 
to prevent their having the same differentiae: for the greater 
class is predicated of the lesser, so that all the differentiae of 
the predicate will be differentiae also of the subject. 

Expressions which are in no way composite signify substance, 
quantity, quality, relation, place, time, position, state, action, or 
affection. To sketch my meaning roughly, examples of substance 
are ‘man’ or ‘the horse’, of quantity, such terms as ‘two cubits 
long’ or ‘three cubits long’, of quality, such attributes as ‘white’, 
‘grammatical’. ‘Double’, ‘half’, ‘greater’, fall under the category 
of relation; ‘in a the market place’, ‘in the Lyceum’, under that of 
place; ‘yesterday’, ‘last year’, under that of time. ‘Lying’, ‘sitting’, 


are terms indicating position, ‘shod’, ‘armed’, state; ‘to lance’, ‘to 
cauterize’, action; ‘to be lanced’, ‘to be cauterized’, affection. 

No one of these terms, in and by itself, involves an affirmation; 
it is by the combination of such terms that positive or negative 
statements arise. For every assertion must, as is admitted, be 
either true or false, whereas expressions which are not in any 
way composite such as ‘man’, ‘white’, ‘runs’, ‘wins’, cannot be 
either true or false. 

Substance, in the truest and primary and most definite sense of 
the word, is that which is neither predicable of a subject nor 
present in a subject; for instance, the individual man or horse. 
But in a secondary sense those things are called substances 
within which, as species, the primary substances are included; 
also those which, as genera, include the species. For instance, 
the individual man is included in the species ‘man’, and the 
genus to which the species belongs is ‘animal’; these, therefore 

– that is to say, the species ‘man’ and the genus ‘animal, – are 
termed secondary substances. 
It is plain from what has been said that both the name and the 
definition of the predicate must be predicable of the subject. For 
instance, ‘man’ is predicted of the individual man. Now in this 
case the name of the species man’ is applied to the individual, 
for we use the term ‘man’ in describing the individual; and the 
definition of ‘man’ will also be predicated of the individual man, 
for the individual man is both man and animal. Thus, both the 
name and the definition of the species are predicable of the 
individual. 


With regard, on the other hand, to those things which are 
present in a subject, it is generally the case that neither their 
name nor their definition is predicable of that in which they are 
present. Though, however, the definition is never predicable, 
there is nothing in certain cases to prevent the name being 
used. For instance, ‘white’ being present in a body is predicated 
of that in which it is present, for a body is called white: the 
definition, however, of the colour white’ is never predicable of 
the body. 

Everything except primary substances is either predicable of a 
primary substance or present in a primary substance. This 
becomes evident by reference to particular instances which 
occur. ‘Animal’ is predicated of the species ‘man’, therefore of 
the individual man, for if there were no individual man of 
whom it could be predicated, it could not be predicated of the 
species ‘man’ at all. Again, colour is present in body, therefore in 
individual bodies, for if there were no individual body in which 
it was present, it could not be present in body at all. Thus 
everything except primary substances is either predicated of 
primary substances, or is present in them, and if these last did 
not exist, it would be impossible for anything else to exist. 

Of secondary substances, the species is more truly substance 
than the genus, being more nearly related to primary substance. 
For if any one should render an account of what a primary 
substance is, he would render a more instructive account, and 
one more proper to the subject, by stating the species than by 
stating the genus. Thus, he would give a more instructive 
account of an individual man by stating that he was man than 
by stating that he was animal, for the former description is 
peculiar to the individual in a greater degree, while the latter is 
too general. Again, the man who gives an account of the nature 
of an individual tree will give a more instructive account by 


mentioning the species ‘tree’ than by mentioning the genus 
‘plant’. 

Moreover, primary substances are most properly called 
substances in virtue of the fact that they are the entities which 
underlie every. else, and that everything else is either predicated 
of them or present in them. Now the same relation which 
subsists between primary substance and everything else 
subsists also between the species and the genus: for the species 
is to the genus as subject is to predicate, since the genus is 
predicated of the species, whereas the species cannot be 
predicated of the genus. Thus we have a second ground for 
asserting that the species is more truly substance than the 
genus. 

Of species themselves, except in the case of such as are genera, 
no one is more truly substance than another. We should not 
give a more appropriate account of the individual man by 
stating the species to which he belonged, than we should of an 
individual horse by adopting the same method of definition. In 
the same way, of primary substances, no one is more truly 
substance than another; an individual man is not more truly 
substance than an individual ox. 

It is, then, with good reason that of all that remains, when we 
exclude primary substances, we concede to species and genera 
alone the name ‘secondary substance’, for these alone of all the 
predicates convey a knowledge of primary substance. For it is by 
stating the species or the genus that we appropriately define 
any individual man; and we shall make our definition more 
exact by stating the former than by stating the latter. All other 
things that we state, such as that he is white, that he runs, and 
so on, are irrelevant to the definition. Thus it is just that these 
alone, apart from primary substances, should be called 
substances. 


Further, primary substances are most properly so called, 
because they underlie and are the subjects of everything else. 
Now the same relation that subsists between primary substance 
and everything else subsists also between the species and the 
genus to which the primary substance belongs, on the one 
hand, and every attribute which is not included within these, on 
the other. For these are the subjects of all such. If we call an 
individual man ‘skilled in grammar’, the predicate is applicable 
also to the species and to the genus to which he belongs. This 
law holds good in all cases. 

It is a common characteristic of all sub. stance that it is never 
present in a subject. For primary substance is neither present in 
a subject nor predicated of a subject; while, with regard to 
secondary substances, it is clear from the following arguments 
(apart from others) that they are not present in a subject. For 
‘man’ is predicated of the individual man, but is not present in 
any subject: for manhood is not present in the individual man. 
In the same way, ‘animal’ is also predicated of the individual 
man, but is not present in him. Again, when a thing is present 
in a subject, though the name may quite well be applied to that 
in which it is present, the definition cannot be applied. Yet of 
secondary substances, not only the name, but also the 
definition, applies to the subject: we should use both the 
definition of the species and that of the genus with reference to 
the individual man. Thus substance cannot be present in a 
subject. 

Yet this is not peculiar to substance, for it is also the case that 
differentiae cannot be present in subjects. The characteristics 
‘terrestrial’ and ‘two-footed’ are predicated of the species ‘man’, 
but not present in it. For they are not in man. Moreover, the 
definition of the differentia may be predicated of that of which 
the differentia itself is predicated. For instance, if the 
characteristic ‘terrestrial’ is predicated of the species ‘man’, the 


definition also of that characteristic may be used to form the 
predicate of the species ‘man’: for ‘man’ is terrestrial. 

The fact that the parts of substances appear to be present in the 
whole, as in a subject, should not make us apprehensive lest we 
should have to admit that such parts are not substances: for in 
explaining the phrase ‘being present in a subject’, we stated’ 
that we meant ‘otherwise than as parts in a whole’. 

It is the mark of substances and of differentiae that, in all 
propositions of which they form the predicate, they are 
predicated univocally. For all such propositions have for their 
subject either the individual or the species. It is true that, 
inasmuch as primary substance is not predicable of anything, it 
can never form the predicate of any proposition. But of 
secondary substances, the species is predicated of the 
individual, the genus both of the species and of the individual. 
Similarly the differentiae are predicated of the species and of 
the individuals. Moreover, the definition of the species and that 
of the genus are applicable to the primary substance, and that 
of the genus to the species. For all that is predicated of the 
predicate will be predicated also of the subject. Similarly, the 
definition of the differentiae will be applicable to the species 
and to the individuals. But it was stated above that the word 
‘univocal’ was applied to those things which had both name 
and definition in common. It is, therefore, established that in 
every proposition, of which either substance or a differentia 
forms the predicate, these are predicated univocally. 

All substance appears to signify that which is individual. In the 
case of primary substance this is indisputably true, for the thing 
is a unit. In the case of secondary substances, when we speak, 
for instance, of ‘man’ or ‘animal’, our form of speech gives the 
impression that we are here also indicating that which is 
individual, but the impression is not strictly true; for a 


secondary substance is not an individual, but a class with a 
certain qualification; for it is not one and single as a primary 
substance is; the words ‘man’, ‘animal’, are predicable of more 
than one subject. 

Yet species and genus do not merely indicate quality, like the 
term ‘white’; ‘white’ indicates quality and nothing further, but 
species and genus determine the quality with reference to a 
substance: they signify substance qualitatively differentiated. 
The determinate qualification covers a larger field in the case of 
the genus that in that of the species: he who uses the word 
‘animal’ is herein using a word of wider extension than he who 
uses the word ‘man’. 

Another mark of substance is that it has no contrary. What 
could be the contrary of any primary substance, such as the 
individual man or animal? It has none. Nor can the species or 
the genus have a contrary. Yet this characteristic is not peculiar 
to substance, but is true of many other things, such as quantity. 
There is nothing that forms the contrary of ‘two cubits long’ or 
of ‘three cubits long’, or of ‘ten’, or of any such term. A man may 
contend that ‘much’ is the contrary of ‘little’, or ‘great’ of ‘small’, 
but of definite quantitative terms no contrary exists. 

Substance, again, does not appear to admit of variation of 
degree. I do not mean by this that one substance cannot be 
more or less truly substance than another, for it has already 
been stated’ that this is the case; but that no single substance 
admits of varying degrees within itself. For instance, one 
particular substance, ‘man’, cannot be more or less man either 
than himself at some other time or than some other man. One 
man cannot be more man than another, as that which is white 
may be more or less white than some other white object, or as 
that which is beautiful may be more or less beautiful than some 
other beautiful object. The same quality, moreover, is said to 


subsist in a thing in varying degrees at different times. A body, 
being white, is said to be whiter at one time than it was before, 
or, being warm, is said to be warmer or less warm than at some 
other time. But substance is not said to be more or less that 
which it is: a man is not more truly a man at one time than he 
was before, nor is anything, if it is substance, more or less what 
it is. Substance, then, does not admit of variation of degree. 

The most distinctive mark of substance appears to be that, 
while remaining numerically one and the same, it is capable of 
admitting contrary qualities. From among things other than 
substance, we should find ourselves unable to bring forward any 
which possessed this mark. Thus, one and the same colour 
cannot be white and black. Nor can the same one action be 
good and bad: this law holds good with everything that is not 
substance. But one and the selfsame substance, while retaining 
its identity, is yet capable of admitting contrary qualities. The 
same individual person is at one time white, at another black, at 
one time warm, at another cold, at one time good, at another 
bad. This capacity is found nowhere else, though it might be 
maintained that a statement or opinion was an exception to the 
rule. The same statement, it is agreed, can be both true and 
false. For if the statement ‘he is sitting’ is true, yet, when the 
person in question has risen, the same statement will be false. 
The same applies to opinions. For if any one thinks truly that a 
person is sitting, yet, when that person has risen, this same 
opinion, if still held, will be false. Yet although this exception 
may be allowed, there is, nevertheless, a difference in the 
manner in which the thing takes place. It is by themselves 
changing that substances admit contrary qualities. It is thus 
that that which was hot becomes cold, for it has entered into a 
different state. Similarly that which was white becomes black, 
and that which was bad good, by a process of change; and in the 
same way in all other cases it is by changing that substances 
are capable of admitting contrary qualities. But statements and 


opinions themselves remain unaltered in all respects: it is by 
the alteration in the facts of the case that the contrary quality 
comes to be theirs. The statement ‘he is sitting’ remains 
unaltered, but it is at one time true, at another false, according 
to circumstances. What has been said of statements applies 
also to opinions. Thus, in respect of the manner in which the 
thing takes place, it is the peculiar mark of substance that it 
should be capable of admitting contrary qualities; for it is by 
itself changing that it does so. 

If, then, a man should make this exception and contend that 
statements and opinions are capable of admitting contrary 
qualities, his contention is unsound. For statements and 
opinions are said to have this capacity, not because they 
themselves undergo modification, but because this modification 
occurs in the case of something else. The truth or falsity of a 
statement depends on facts, and not on any power on the part 
of the statement itself of admitting contrary qualities. In short, 
there is nothing which can alter the nature of statements and 
opinions. As, then, no change takes place in themselves, these 
cannot be said to be capable of admitting contrary qualities. 

But it is by reason of the modification which takes place within 
the substance itself that a substance is said to be capable of 
admitting contrary qualities; for a substance admits within 
itself either disease or health, whiteness or blackness. It is in 
this sense that it is said to be capable of admitting contrary 
qualities. 

To sum up, it is a distinctive mark of substance, that, while 
remaining numerically one and the same, it is capable of 
admitting contrary qualities, the modification taking place 
through a change in the substance itself. 

Let these remarks suffice on the subject of substance. 


Quantity is either discrete or continuous. Moreover, some 
quantities are such that each part of the whole has a relative 
position to the other parts: others have within them no such 
relation of part to part. 

Instances of discrete quantities are number and speech; of 
continuous, lines, surfaces, solids, and, besides these, time and 
place. 

In the case of the parts of a number, there is no common 
boundary at which they join. For example: two fives make ten, 
but the two fives have no common boundary, but are separate; 
the parts three and seven also do not join at any boundary. Nor, 
to generalize, would it ever be possible in the case of number 
that there should be a common boundary among the parts; they 
are always separate. Number, therefore, is a discrete quantity. 

The same is true of speech. That speech is a quantity is evident: 
for it is measured in long and short syllables. I mean here that 
speech which is vocal. Moreover, it is a discrete quantity for its 
parts have no common boundary. There is no common 
boundary at which the syllables join, but each is separate and 
distinct from the rest. 

A line, on the other hand, is a continuous quantity, for it is 
possible to find a common boundary at which its parts join. In 
the case of the line, this common boundary is the point; in the 
case of the plane, it is the line: for the parts of the plane have 
also a common boundary. Similarly you can find a common 
boundary in the case of the parts of a solid, namely either a line 
or a plane. 


Space and time also belong to this class of quantities. Time, 
past, present, and future, forms a continuous whole. Space, 
likewise, is a continuous quantity; for the parts of a solid occupy 
a certain space, and these have a common boundary; it follows 
that the parts of space also, which are occupied by the parts of 
the solid, have the same common boundary as the parts of the 
solid. Thus, not only time, but space also, is a continuous 
quantity, for its parts have a common boundary. 

Quantities consist either of parts which bear a relative position 
each to each, or of parts which do not. The parts of a line bear a 
relative position to each other, for each lies somewhere, and it 
would be possible to distinguish each, and to state the position 
of each on the plane and to explain to what sort of part among 
the rest each was contiguous. Similarly the parts of a plane 
have position, for it could similarly be stated what was the 
position of each and what sort of parts were contiguous. The 
same is true with regard to the solid and to space. But it would 
be impossible to show that the arts of a number had a relative 
position each to each, or a particular position, or to state what 
parts were contiguous. Nor could this be done in the case of 
time, for none of the parts of time has an abiding existence, and 
that which does not abide can hardly have position. It would be 
better to say that such parts had a relative order, in virtue of one 
being prior to another. Similarly with number: in counting, ‘one’ 
is prior to ‘two’, and ‘two’ to ‘three’, and thus the parts of 
number may be said to possess a relative order, though it would 
be impossible to discover any distinct position for each. This 
holds good also in the case of speech. None of its parts has an 
abiding existence: when once a syllable is pronounced, it is not 
possible to retain it, so that, naturally, as the parts do not abide, 
they cannot have position. Thus, some quantities consist of 
parts which have position, and some of those which have not. 


Strictly speaking, only the things which I have mentioned 
belong to the category of quantity: everything else that is called 
quantitative is a quantity in a secondary sense. It is because we 
have in mind some one of these quantities, properly so called, 
that we apply quantitative terms to other things. We speak of 
what is white as large, because the surface over which the 
white extends is large; we speak of an action or a process as 
lengthy, because the time covered is long; these things cannot 
in their own right claim the quantitative epithet. For instance, 
should any one explain how long an action was, his statement 
would be made in terms of the time taken, to the effect that it 
lasted a year, or something of that sort. In the same way, he 
would explain the size of a white object in terms of surface, for 
he would state the area which it covered. Thus the things 
already mentioned, and these alone, are in their intrinsic nature 
quantities; nothing else can claim the name in its own right, 
but, if at all, only in a secondary sense. 

Quantities have no contraries. In the case of definite quantities 
this is obvious; thus, there is nothing that is the contrary of ‘two 
cubits long’ or of ‘three cubits long’, or of a surface, or of any 
such quantities. A man might, indeed, argue that ‘much’ was 
the contrary of ‘little’, and ‘great’ of ‘small’. But these are not 
quantitative, but relative; things are not great or small 
absolutely, they are so called rather as the result of an act of 
comparison. For instance, a mountain is called small, a grain 
large, in virtue of the fact that the latter is greater than others of 
its kind, the former less. Thus there is a reference here to an 
external standard, for if the terms ‘great’ and ‘small’ were used 
absolutely, a mountain would never be called small or a grain 
large. Again, we say that there are many people in a village, and 
few in Athens, although those in the city are many times as 
numerous as those in the village: or we say that a house has 
many in it, and a theatre few, though those in the theatre far 
outnumber those in the house. The terms ‘two cubits long, 


"three cubits long,’ and so on indicate quantity, the terms ‘great’ 
and ‘small’ indicate relation, for they have reference to an 
external standard. It is, therefore, plain that these are to be 
classed as relative. 

Again, whether we define them as quantitative or not, they 
have no contraries: for how can there be a contrary of an 
attribute which is not to be apprehended in or by itself, but only 
by reference to something external? Again, if ‘great’ and ‘small’ 
are contraries, it will come about that the same subject can 
admit contrary qualities at one and the same time, and that 
things will themselves be contrary to themselves. For it 
happens at times that the same thing is both small and great. 
For the same thing may be small in comparison with one thing, 
and great in comparison with another, so that the same thing 
comes to be both small and great at one and the same time, and 
is of such a nature as to admit contrary qualities at one and the 
same moment. Yet it was agreed, when substance was being 
discussed, that nothing admits contrary qualities at one and the 
same moment. For though substance is capable of admitting 
contrary qualities, yet no one is at the same time both sick and 
healthy, nothing is at the same time both white and black. Nor 
is there anything which is qualified in contrary ways at one and 
the same time. 

Moreover, if these were contraries, they would themselves be 
contrary to themselves. For if ‘great’ is the contrary of ‘small’, 
and the same thing is both great and small at the same time, 
then ‘small’ or ‘great’ is the contrary of itself. But this is 
impossible. The term ‘great’, therefore, is not the contrary of the 
term ‘small’, nor ‘much’ of ‘little’. And even though a man 
should call these terms not relative but quantitative, they would 
not have contraries. 


It is in the case of space that quantity most plausibly appears to 
admit of a contrary. For men define the term ‘above’ as the 
contrary of ‘below’, when it is the region at the centre they 
mean by ‘below’; and this is so, because nothing is farther from 
the extremities of the universe than the region at the centre. 
Indeed, it seems that in defining contraries of every kind men 
have recourse to a spatial metaphor, for they say that those 
things are contraries which, within the same class, are 
separated by the greatest possible distance. 

Quantity does not, it appears, admit of variation of degree. One 
thing cannot be two cubits long in a greater degree than 
another. Similarly with regard to number: what is ‘three’ is not 
more truly three than what is ‘five’ is five; nor is one set of three 
more truly three than another set. Again, one period of time is 
not said to be more truly time than another. Nor is there any 
other kind of quantity, of all that have been mentioned, with 
regard to which variation of degree can be predicated. The 
category of quantity, therefore, does not admit of variation of 
degree. 

The most distinctive mark of quantity is that equality and 
inequality are predicated of it. Each of the aforesaid quantities 
is said to be equal or unequal. For instance, one solid is said to 
be equal or unequal to another; number, too, and time can have 
these terms applied to them, indeed can all those kinds of 
quantity that have been mentioned. 

That which is not a quantity can by no means, it would seem, 
be termed equal or unequal to anything else. One particular 
disposition or one particular quality, such as whiteness, is by no 
means compared with another in terms of equality and 
inequality but rather in terms of similarity. Thus it is the 
distinctive mark of quantity that it can be called equal and 
unequal. 


Those things are called relative, which, being either said to be of 
something else or related to something else, are explained by 
reference to that other thing. For instance, the word ‘superior’ is 
explained by reference to something else, for it is superiority 
over something else that is meant. Similarly, the expression 
‘double’ has this external reference, for it is the double of 
something else that is meant. So it is with everything else of 
this kind. There are, moreover, other relatives, e.g. habit, 
disposition, perception, knowledge, and attitude. The 
significance of all these is explained by a reference to 
something else and in no other way. Thus, a habit is a habit of 
something, knowledge is knowledge of something, attitude is 
the attitude of something. So it is with all other relatives that 
have been mentioned. Those terms, then, are called relative, the 
nature of which is explained by reference to something else, the 
preposition ‘of’ or some other preposition being used to indicate 
the relation. Thus, one mountain is called great in comparison 
with son with another; for the mountain claims this attribute by 
comparison with something. Again, that which is called similar 
must be similar to something else, and all other such attributes 
have this external reference. It is to be noted that lying and 
standing and sitting are particular attitudes, but attitude is itself 
a relative term. To lie, to stand, to be seated, are not themselves 
attitudes, but take their name from the aforesaid attitudes. 

It is possible for relatives to have contraries. Thus virtue has a 
contrary, vice, these both being relatives; knowledge, too, has a 
contrary, ignorance. But this is not the mark of all relatives; 
‘double’ and ‘triple’ have no contrary, nor indeed has any such 
term. 


It also appears that relatives can admit of variation of degree. 
For ‘like’ and ‘unlike’, ‘equal’ and ‘unequal’, have the 
modifications ‘more’ and ‘less’ applied to them, and each of 
these is relative in character: for the terms ‘like’ and ‘unequal’ 
bear ‘unequal’ bear a reference to something external. Yet, 
again, it is not every relative term that admits of variation of 
degree. No term such as ‘double’ admits of this modification. All 
relatives have correlatives: by the term ‘slave’ we mean the 
slave of a master, by the term ‘master’, the master of a slave; by 
‘double’, the double of its hall; by ‘half’, the half of its double; by 
‘greater’, greater than that which is less; by ‘less,’ less than that 
which is greater. 

So it is with every other relative term; but the case we use to 
express the correlation differs in some instances. Thus, by 
knowledge we mean knowledge the knowable; by the knowable, 
that which is to be apprehended by knowledge; by perception, 
perception of the perceptible; by the perceptible, that which is 
apprehended by perception. 

Sometimes, however, reciprocity of correlation does not appear 
to exist. This comes about when a blunder is made, and that to 
which the relative is related is not accurately stated. If a man 
states that a wing is necessarily relative to a bird, the connexion 
between these two will not be reciprocal, for it will not be 
possible to say that a bird is a bird by reason of its wings. The 
reason is that the original statement was inaccurate, for the 
wing is not said to be relative to the bird qua bird, since many 
creatures besides birds have wings, but qua winged creature. If, 
then, the statement is made accurate, the connexion will be 
reciprocal, for we can speak of a wing, having reference 
necessarily to a winged creature, and of a winged creature as 
being such because of its wings. 


Occasionally, perhaps, it is necessary to coin words, if no word 
exists by which a correlation can adequately be explained. If we 
define a rudder as necessarily having reference to a boat, our 
definition will not be appropriate, for the rudder does not have 
this reference to a boat qua boat, as there are boats which have 
no rudders. Thus we cannot use the terms reciprocally, for the 
word ‘boat’ cannot be said to find its explanation in the word 
‘rudder’. As there is no existing word, our definition would 
perhaps be more accurate if we coined some word like 
‘ruddered’ as the correlative of ‘rudder’. If we express ourselves 
thus accurately, at any rate the terms are reciprocally 
connected, for the ‘ruddered’ thing is ‘ruddered’ in virtue of its 
rudder. So it is in all other cases. A head will be more accurately 
defined as the correlative of that which is ‘headed’, than as that 
of an animal, for the animal does not have a head qua animal, 
since many animals have no head. 

Thus we may perhaps most easily comprehend that to which a 
thing is related, when a name does not exist, if, from that which 
has a name, we derive a new name, and apply it to that with 
which the first is reciprocally connected, as in the aforesaid 
instances, when we derived the word ‘winged’ from ‘wing’ and 
from ‘rudder’. 

All relatives, then, if properly defined, have a correlative. I add 
this condition because, if that to which they are related is stated 
as haphazard and not accurately, the two are not found to be 
interdependent. Let me state what I mean more clearly. Even in 
the case of acknowledged correlatives, and where names exist 
for each, there will be no interdependence if one of the two is 
denoted, not by that name which expresses the correlative 
notion, but by one of irrelevant significance. The term ‘slave,’ if 
defined as related, not to a master, but to a man, or a biped, or 
anything of that sort, is not reciprocally connected with that in 
relation to which it is defined, for the statement is not exact. 


Further, if one thing is said to be correlative with another, and 
the terminology used is correct, then, though all irrelevant 
attributes should be removed, and only that one attribute left in 
virtue of which it was correctly stated to be correlative with that 
other, the stated correlation will still exist. If the correlative of 
‘the slave’ is said to be ‘the master’, then, though all irrelevant 
attributes of the said ‘master’, such as ‘biped’, ‘receptive of 
knowledge’, ‘human’, should be removed, and the attribute 
‘master’ alone left, the stated correlation existing between him 
and the slave will remain the same, for it is of a master that a 
slave is said to be the slave. On the other hand, if, of two 
correlatives, one is not correctly termed, then, when all other 
attributes are removed and that alone is left in virtue of which it 
was stated to be correlative, the stated correlation will be found 
to have disappeared. 

For suppose the correlative of ‘the slave’ should be said to be 
‘the man’, or the correlative of ‘the wing"the bird’; if the 
attribute ‘master’ be withdrawn from’ the man’, the correlation 
between ‘the man’ and ‘the slave’ will cease to exist, for if the 
man is not a master, the slave is not a slave. Similarly, if the 
attribute ‘winged’ be withdrawn from ‘the bird’, ‘the wing’ will 
no longer be relative; for if the so-called correlative is not 
winged, it follows that ‘the wing’ has no correlative. 

Thus it is essential that the correlated terms should be exactly 
designated; if there is a name existing, the statement will be 
easy; if not, it is doubtless our duty to construct names. When 
the terminology is thus correct, it is evident that all correlatives 
are interdependent. 

Correlatives are thought to come into existence simultaneously. 
This is for the most part true, as in the case of the double and 
the half. The existence of the half necessitates the existence of 
that of which it is a half. Similarly the existence of a master 


necessitates the existence of a slave, and that of a slave implies 
that of a master; these are merely instances of a general rule. 
Moreover, they cancel one another; for if there is no double it 
follows that there is no half, and vice versa; this rule also 
applies to all such correlatives. Yet it does not appear to be true 
in all cases that correlatives come into existence 
simultaneously. The object of knowledge would appear to exist 
before knowledge itself, for it is usually the case that we acquire 
knowledge of objects already existing; it would be difficult, if 
not impossible, to find a branch of knowledge the beginning of 
the existence of which was contemporaneous with that of its 
object. 

Again, while the object of knowledge, if it ceases to exist, 
cancels at the same time the knowledge which was its 
correlative, the converse of this is not true. It is true that if the 
object of knowledge does not exist there can be no knowledge: 
for there will no longer be anything to know. Yet it is equally 
true that, if knowledge of a certain object does not exist, the 
object may nevertheless quite well exist. Thus, in the case of the 
squaring of the circle, if indeed that process is an object of 
knowledge, though it itself exists as an object of knowledge, yet 
the knowledge of it has not yet come into existence. Again, if all 
animals ceased to exist, there would be no knowledge, but there 
might yet be many objects of knowledge. 

This is likewise the case with regard to perception: for the 
object of perception is, it appears, prior to the act of perception. 
If the perceptible is annihilated, perception also will cease to 
exist; but the annihilation of perception does not cancel the 
existence of the perceptible. For perception implies a body 
perceived and a body in which perception takes place. Now if 
that which is perceptible is annihilated, it follows that the body 
is annihilated, for the body is a perceptible thing; and if the 
body does not exist, it follows that perception also ceases to 


exist. Thus the annihilation of the perceptible involves that of 
perception. 

But the annihilation of perception does not involve that of the 
perceptible. For if the animal is annihilated, it follows that 
perception also is annihilated, but perceptibles such as body, 
heat, sweetness, bitterness, and so on, will remain. 

Again, perception is generated at the same time as the 
perceiving subject, for it comes into existence at the same time 
as the animal. But the perceptible surely exists before 
perception; for fire and water and such elements, out of which 
the animal is itself composed, exist before the animal is an 
animal at all, and before perception. Thus it would seem that 
the perceptible exists before perception. 

It may be questioned whether it is true that no substance is 
relative, as seems to be the case, or whether exception is to be 
made in the case of certain secondary substances. With regard 
to primary substances, it is quite true that there is no such 
possibility, for neither wholes nor parts of primary substances 
are relative. The individual man or ox is not defined with 
reference to something external. Similarly with the parts: a 
particular hand or head is not defined as a particular hand or 
head of a particular person, but as the hand or head of a 
particular person. It is true also, for the most part at least, in the 
case of secondary substances; the species ‘man’ and the species 
‘ox’ are not defined with reference to anything outside 
themselves. Wood, again, is only relative in so far as it is some 
one’s property, not in so far as it is wood. It is plain, then, that in 
the cases mentioned substance is not relative. But with regard 
to some secondary substances there is a difference of opinion; 
thus, such terms as ‘head’ and ‘hand’ are defined with reference 
to that of which the things indicated are a part, and so it comes 
about that these appear to have a relative character. Indeed, if 


our definition of that which is relative was complete, it is very 
difficult, if not impossible, to prove that no substance is relative. 
If, however, our definition was not complete, if those things only 
are properly called relative in the case of which relation to an 
external object is a necessary condition of existence, perhaps 
some explanation of the dilemma may be found. 

The former definition does indeed apply to all relatives, but the 
fact that a thing is explained with reference to something else 
does not make it essentially relative. 

From this it is plain that, if a man definitely apprehends a 
relative thing, he will also definitely apprehend that to which it 
is relative. Indeed this is self-evident: for if a man knows that 
some particular thing is relative, assuming that we call that a 
relative in the case of which relation to something is a 
necessary condition of existence, he knows that also to which it 
is related. For if he does not know at all that to which it is 
related, he will not know whether or not it is relative. This is 
clear, moreover, in particular instances. If a man knows 
definitely that such and such a thing is ‘double’, he will also 
forthwith know definitely that of which it is the double. For if 
there is nothing definite of which he knows it to be the double, 
he does not know at all that it is double. Again, if he knows that 
a thing is more beautiful, it follows necessarily that he will 
forthwith definitely know that also than which it is more 
beautiful. He will not merely know indefinitely that it is more 
beautiful than something which is less beautiful, for this would 
be supposition, not knowledge. For if he does not know 
definitely that than which it is more beautiful, he can no longer 
claim to know definitely that it is more beautiful than 
something else which is less beautiful: for it might be that 
nothing was less beautiful. It is, therefore, evident that if a man 
apprehends some relative thing definitely, he necessarily knows 
that also definitely to which it is related. 


Now the head, the hand, and such things are substances, and it 
is possible to know their essential character definitely, but it 
does not necessarily follow that we should know that to which 
they are related. It is not possible to know forthwith whose 
head or hand is meant. Thus these are not relatives, and, this 
being the case, it would be true to say that no substance is 
relative in character. It is perhaps a difficult matter, in such 
cases, to make a positive statement without more exhaustive 
examination, but to have raised questions with regard to details 
is not without advantage. 

By ‘quality’ I mean that in virtue of which people are said to be 
such and such. 

Quality is a term that is used in many senses. One sort of 
quality let us call ‘habit’ or ‘disposition’. Habit differs from 
disposition in being more lasting and more firmly established. 
The various kinds of knowledge and of virtue are habits, for 
knowledge, even when acquired only in a moderate degree, is, it 
is agreed, abiding in its character and difficult to displace, 
unless some great mental upheaval takes place, through disease 
or any such cause. The virtues, also, such as justice, self-
restraint, and so on, are not easily dislodged or dismissed, so as 
to give place to vice. 

By a disposition, on the other hand, we mean a condition that is 
easily changed and quickly gives place to its opposite. Thus, 
heat, cold, disease, health, and so on are dispositions. For a man 
is disposed in one way or another with reference to these, but 
quickly changes, becoming cold instead of warm, ill instead of 
well. So it is with all other dispositions also, unless through 


lapse of time a disposition has itself become inveterate and 
almost impossible to dislodge: in which case we should perhaps 
go so far as to call it a habit. 

It is evident that men incline to call those conditions habits 
which are of a more or less permanent type and difficult to 
displace; for those who are not retentive of knowledge, but 
volatile, are not said to have such and such a ‘habit’ as regards 
knowledge, yet they are disposed, we may say, either better or 
worse, towards knowledge. Thus habit differs from disposition 
in this, that while the latter in ephemeral, the former is 
permanent and difficult to alter. 

Habits are at the same time dispositions, but dispositions are 
not necessarily habits. For those who have some specific habit 
may be said also, in virtue of that habit, to be thus or thus 
disposed; but those who are disposed in some specific way have 
not in all cases the corresponding habit. 

Another sort of quality is that in virtue of which, for example, 
we call men good boxers or runners, or healthy or sickly: in fact 
it includes all those terms which refer to inborn capacity or 
incapacity. Such things are not predicated of a person in virtue 
of his disposition, but in virtue of his inborn capacity or 
incapacity to do something with ease or to avoid defeat of any 
kind. Persons are called good boxers or good runners, not in 
virtue of such and such a disposition, but in virtue of an inborn 
capacity to accomplish something with ease. Men are called 
healthy in virtue of the inborn capacity of easy resistance to 
those unhealthy influences that may ordinarily arise; unhealthy, 
in virtue of the lack of this capacity. Similarly with regard to 
softness and hardness. Hardness is predicated of a thing 
because it has that capacity of resistance which enables it to 
withstand disintegration; softness, again, is predicated of a 
thing by reason of the lack of that capacity. 


A third class within this category is that of affective qualities 
and affections. Sweetness, bitterness, sourness, are examples of 
this sort of quality, together with all that is akin to these; heat, 
moreover, and cold, whiteness, and blackness are affective 
qualities. It is evident that these are qualities, for those things 
that possess them are themselves said to be such and such by 
reason of their presence. Honey is called sweet because it 
contains sweetness; the body is called white because it contains 
whiteness; and so in all other cases. 

The term ‘affective quality’ is not used as indicating that those 
things which admit these qualities are affected in any way. 
Honey is not called sweet because it is affected in a specific way, 
nor is this what is meant in any other instance. Similarly heat 
and cold are called affective qualities, not because those things 
which admit them are affected. What is meant is that these said 
qualities are capable of producing an ‘affection’ in the way of 
perception. For sweetness has the power of affecting the sense 
of taste; heat, that of touch; and so it is with the rest of these 
qualities. 

Whiteness and blackness, however, and the other colours, are 
not said to be affective qualities in this sense, but – because 
they themselves are the results of an affection. It is plain that 
many changes of colour take place because of affections. When 
a man is ashamed, he blushes; when he is afraid, he becomes 
pale, and so on. So true is this, that when a man is by nature 
liable to such affections, arising from some concomitance of 
elements in his constitution, it is a probable inference that he 
has the corresponding complexion of skin. For the same 
disposition of bodily elements, which in the former instance 
was momentarily present in the case of an access of shame, 
might be a result of a man’s natural temperament, so as to 
produce the corresponding colouring also as a natural 
characteristic. All conditions, therefore, of this kind, if caused by 


certain permanent and lasting affections, are called affective 
qualities. For pallor and duskiness of complexion are called 
qualities, inasmuch as we are said to be such and such in virtue 
of them, not only if they originate in natural constitution, but 
also if they come about through long disease or sunburn, and 
are difficult to remove, or indeed remain throughout life. For in 
the same way we are said to be such and such because of these. 

Those conditions, however, which arise from causes which may 
easily be rendered ineffective or speedily removed, are called, 
not qualities, but affections: for we are not said to be such 
virtue of them. The man who blushes through shame is not said 
to be a constitutional blusher, nor is the man who becomes pale 
through fear said to be constitutionally pale. He is said rather to 
have been affected. 

Thus such conditions are called affections, not qualities. 

In like manner there are affective qualities and affections of the 
soul. That temper with which a man is born and which has its 
origin in certain deep-seated affections is called a quality. I 
mean such conditions as insanity, irascibility, and so on: for 
people are said to be mad or irascible in virtue of these. 
Similarly those abnormal psychic states which are not inborn, 
but arise from the concomitance of certain other elements, and 
are difficult to remove, or altogether permanent, are called 
qualities, for in virtue of them men are said to be such and 
such. 

Those, however, which arise from causes easily rendered 
ineffective are called affections, not qualities. Suppose that a 
man is irritable when vexed: he is not even spoken of as a bad-
tempered man, when in such circumstances he loses his 
temper somewhat, but rather is said to be affected. Such 
conditions are therefore termed, not qualities, but affections. 


The fourth sort of quality is figure and the shape that belongs to 
a thing; and besides this, straightness and curvedness and any 
other qualities of this type; each of these defines a thing as 
being such and such. Because it is triangular or quadrangular a 
thing is said to have a specific character, or again because it is 
straight or curved; in fact a thing’s shape in every case gives rise 
to a qualification of it. 

Rarity and density, roughness and smoothness, seem to be 
terms indicating quality: yet these, it would appear, really 
belong to a class different from that of quality. For it is rather a 
certain relative position of the parts composing the thing thus 
qualified which, it appears, is indicated by each of these terms. 
A thing is dense, owing to the fact that its parts are closely 
combined with one another; rare, because there are interstices 
between the parts; smooth, because its parts lie, so to speak, 
evenly; rough, because some parts project beyond others. 

There may be other sorts of quality, but those that are most 
properly so called have, we may safely say, been enumerated. 

These, then, are qualities, and the things that take their name 
from them as derivatives, or are in some other way dependent 
on them, are said to be qualified in some specific way. In most, 
indeed in almost all cases, the name of that which is qualified is 
derived from that of the quality. Thus the terms ‘whiteness’, 
‘grammar’, ‘justice’, give us the adjectives ‘white’, ‘grammatical’, 
‘just’, and so on. 

There are some cases, however, in which, as the quality under 
consideration has no name, it is impossible that those 
possessed of it should have a name that is derivative. For 
instance, the name given to the runner or boxer, who is so 
called in virtue of an inborn capacity, is not derived from that of 
any quality; for lob those capacities have no name assigned to 
them. In this, the inborn capacity is distinct from the science, 


with reference to which men are called, e.g. boxers or wrestlers. 
Such a science is classed as a disposition; it has a name, and is 
called ‘boxing’ or ‘wrestling’ as the case may be, and the name 
given to those disposed in this way is derived from that of the 
science. Sometimes, even though a name exists for the quality, 
that which takes its character from the quality has a name that 
is not a derivative. For instance, the upright man takes his 
character from the possession of the quality of integrity, but the 
name given him is not derived from the word ‘integrity’. Yet this 
does not occur often. 

We may therefore state that those things are said to be 
possessed of some specific quality which have a name derived 
from that of the aforesaid quality, or which are in some other 
way dependent on it. 

One quality may be the contrary of another; thus justice is the 
contrary of injustice, whiteness of blackness, and so on. The 
things, also, which are said to be such and such in virtue of 
these qualities, may be contrary the one to the other; for that 
which is unjust is contrary to that which is just, that which is 
white to that which is black. This, however, is not always the 
case. Red, yellow, and such colours, though qualities, have no 
contraries. 

If one of two contraries is a quality, the other will also be a 
quality. This will be evident from particular instances, if we 
apply the names used to denote the other categories; for 
instance, granted that justice is the contrary of injustice and 
justice is a quality, injustice will also be a quality: neither 
quantity, nor relation, nor place, nor indeed any other category 
but that of quality, will be applicable properly to injustice. So it 
is with all other contraries falling under the category of quality. 

Qualities admit of variation of degree. Whiteness is predicated 
of one thing in a greater or less degree than of another. This is 


also the case with reference to justice. Moreover, one and the 
same thing may exhibit a quality in a greater degree than it did 
before: if a thing is white, it may become whiter. 

Though this is generally the case, there are exceptions. For if we 
should say that justice admitted of variation of degree, 
difficulties might ensue, and this is true with regard to all those 
qualities which are dispositions. There are some, indeed, who 
dispute the possibility of variation here. They maintain that 
justice and health cannot very well admit of variation of degree 
themselves, but that people vary in the degree in which they 
possess these qualities, and that this is the case with 
grammatical learning and all those qualities which are classed 
as dispositions. However that may be, it is an incontrovertible 
fact that the things which in virtue of these qualities are said to 
be what they are vary in the degree in which they possess them; 
for one man is said to be better versed in grammar, or more 
healthy or just, than another, and so on. 

The qualities expressed by the terms ‘triangular’ and 
‘quadrangular’ do not appear to admit of variation of degree, 
nor indeed do any that have to do with figure. For those things 
to which the definition of the triangle or circle is applicable are 
all equally triangular or circular. Those, on the other hand, to 
which the same definition is not applicable, cannot be said to 
differ from one another in degree; the square is no more a circle 
than the rectangle, for to neither is the definition of the circle 
appropriate. In short, if the definition of the term proposed is 
not applicable to both objects, they cannot be compared. Thus it 
is not all qualities which admit of variation of degree. 

Whereas none of the characteristics I have mentioned are 
peculiar to quality, the fact that likeness and unlikeness can be 
predicated with reference to quality only, gives to that category 
its distinctive feature. One thing is like another only with 


reference to that in virtue of which it is such and such; thus this 
forms the peculiar mark of quality. 

We must not be disturbed because it may be argued that, 
though proposing to discuss the category of quality, we have 
included in it many relative terms. We did say that habits and 
dispositions were relative. In practically all such cases the genus 
is relative, the individual not. Thus knowledge, as a genus, is 
explained by reference to something else, for we mean a 
knowledge of something. But particular branches of knowledge 
are not thus explained. The knowledge of grammar is not 
relative to anything external, nor is the knowledge of music, but 
these, if relative at all, are relative only in virtue of their genera; 
thus grammar is said be the knowledge of something, not the 
grammar of something; similarly music is the knowledge of 
something, not the music of something. 

Thus individual branches of knowledge are not relative. And it 
is because we possess these individual branches of knowledge 
that we are said to be such and such. It is these that we actually 
possess: we are called experts because we possess knowledge in 
some particular branch. Those particular branches, therefore, of 
knowledge, in virtue of which we are sometimes said to be such 
and such, are themselves qualities, and are not relative. Further, 
if anything should happen to fall within both the category of 
quality and that of relation, there would be nothing 
extraordinary in classing it under both these heads. 

Action and affection both admit of contraries and also of 
variation of degree. Heating is the contrary of cooling, being 
heated of being cooled, being glad of being vexed. Thus they 



admit of contraries. They also admit of variation of degree: for it 
is possible to heat in a greater or less degree; also to be heated 
in a greater or less degree. Thus action and affection also admit 
of variation of degree. So much, then, is stated with regard to 
these categories. 

We spoke, moreover, of the category of position when we were 
dealing with that of relation, and stated that such terms derived 
their names from those of the corresponding attitudes. 

As for the rest, time, place, state, since they are easily 
intelligible, I say no more about them than was said at the 
beginning, that in the category of state are included such states 
as ‘shod’, ‘armed’, in that of place ‘in the Lyceum’ and so on, as 
was explained before. 

The proposed categories have, then, been adequately dealt with. 

We must next explain the various senses in which the term 
‘opposite’ is used. Things are said to be opposed in four senses: 

(i) as correlatives to one another, (ii) as contraries to one 
another, (iii) as privatives to positives, (iv) as affirmatives to 
negatives. 
Let me sketch my meaning in outline. An instance of the use of 
the word ‘opposite’ with reference to correlatives is afforded by 
the expressions ‘double’ and ‘half’; with reference to contraries 
by ‘bad’ and ‘good’. Opposites in the sense of ‘privatives’ and 
‘positives’ are’ blindness’ and ‘sight’; in the sense of 
affirmatives and negatives, the propositions ‘he sits’, ‘he does 
not sit’. 


(i) Pairs of opposites which fall under the category of relation 
are explained by a reference of the one to the other, the 
reference being indicated by the preposition ‘of’ or by some 
other preposition. Thus, double is a relative term, for that which 
is double is explained as the double of something. Knowledge, 
again, is the opposite of the thing known, in the same sense; 
and the thing known also is explained by its relation to its 
opposite, knowledge. For the thing known is explained as that 
which is known by something, that is, by knowledge. Such 
things, then, as are opposite the one to the other in the sense of 
being correlatives are explained by a reference of the one to the 
other. 
(ii) Pairs of opposites which are contraries are not in any way 
interdependent, but are contrary the one to the other. The good 
is not spoken of as the good of the had, but as the contrary of 
the bad, nor is white spoken of as the white of the black, but as 
the contrary of the black. These two types of opposition are 
therefore distinct. Those contraries which are such that the 
subjects in which they are naturally present, or of which they 
are predicated, must necessarily contain either the one or the 
other of them, have no intermediate, but those in the case of 
which no such necessity obtains, always have an intermediate. 
Thus disease and health are naturally present in the body of an 
animal, and it is necessary that either the one or the other 
should be present in the body of an animal. Odd and even, 
again, are predicated of number, and it is necessary that the one 
or the other should be present in numbers. Now there is no 
intermediate between the terms of either of these two pairs. On 
the other hand, in those contraries with regard to which no 
such necessity obtains, we find an intermediate. Blackness and 
whiteness are naturally present in the body, but it is not 
necessary that either the one or the other should be present in 
the body, inasmuch as it is not true to say that everybody must 
be white or black. Badness and goodness, again, are predicated 

of man, and of many other things, but it is not necessary that 
either the one quality or the other should be present in that of 
which they are predicated: it is not true to say that everything 
that may be good or bad must be either good or bad. These pairs 
of contraries have intermediates: the intermediates between 
white and black are grey, sallow, and all the other colours that 
come between; the intermediate between good and bad is that 
which is neither the one nor the other. 

Some intermediate qualities have names, such as grey and 
sallow and all the other colours that come between white and 
black; in other cases, however, it is not easy to name the 
intermediate, but we must define it as that which is not either 
extreme, as in the case of that which is neither good nor bad, 
neither just nor unjust. 

(iii) ‘privatives’ and ‘Positives’ have reference to the same 
subject. Thus, sight and blindness have reference to the eye. It is 
a universal rule that each of a pair of opposites of this type has 
reference to that to which the particular ‘positive’ is natural. We 
say that that is capable of some particular faculty or possession 
has suffered privation when the faculty or possession in 
question is in no way present in that in which, and at the time 
at which, it should naturally be present. We do not call that 
toothless which has not teeth, or that blind which has not sight, 
but rather that which has not teeth or sight at the time when by 
nature it should. For there are some creatures which from birth 
are without sight, or without teeth, but these are not called 
toothless or blind. 
To be without some faculty or to possess it is not the same as 
the corresponding ‘privative’ or ‘positive’. ‘Sight’ is a ‘positive’, 
‘blindness’ a ‘privative’, but ‘to possess sight’ is not equivalent 
to ‘sight’, ‘to be blind’ is not equivalent to ‘blindness’. Blindness 
is a ‘privative’, to be blind is to be in a state of privation, but is 


not a ‘privative’. Moreover, if ‘blindness’ were equivalent to 
‘being blind’, both would be predicated of the same subject; but 
though a man is said to be blind, he is by no means said to be 
blindness. 

To be in a state of ‘possession’ is, it appears, the opposite of 
being in a state of ‘privation’, just as ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’ 
themselves are opposite. There is the same type of antithesis in 
both cases; for just as blindness is opposed to sight, so is being 
blind opposed to having sight. 

That which is affirmed or denied is not itself affirmation or 
denial. By ‘affirmation’ we mean an affirmative proposition, by 
‘denial’ a negative. Now, those facts which form the matter of 
the affirmation or denial are not propositions; yet these two are 
said to be opposed in the same sense as the affirmation and 
denial, for in this case also the type of antithesis is the same. 
For as the affirmation is opposed to the denial, as in the two 
propositions ‘he sits’, ‘he does not sit’, so also the fact which 
constitutes the matter of the proposition in one case is opposed 
to that in the other, his sitting, that is to say, to his not sitting. 

It is evident that ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’ are not opposed 
each to each in the same sense as relatives. The one is not 
explained by reference to the other; sight is not sight of 
blindness, nor is any other preposition used to indicate the 
relation. Similarly blindness is not said to be blindness of sight, 
but rather, privation of sight. Relatives, moreover, reciprocate; if 
blindness, therefore, were a relative, there would be a 
reciprocity of relation between it and that with which it was 
correlative. But this is not the case. Sight is not called the sight 
of blindness. 

That those terms which fall under the heads of ‘positives’ and 
‘privatives’ are not opposed each to each as contraries, either, is 
plain from the following facts: Of a pair of contraries such that 


they have no intermediate, one or the other must needs be 
present in the subject in which they naturally subsist, or of 
which they are predicated; for it is those, as we proved,’ in the 
case of which this necessity obtains, that have no intermediate. 
Moreover, we cited health and disease, odd and even, as 
instances. But those contraries which have an intermediate are 
not subject to any such necessity. It is not necessary that every 
substance, receptive of such qualities, should be either black or 
white, cold or hot, for something intermediate between these 
contraries may very well be present in the subject. We proved, 
moreover, that those contraries have an intermediate in the 
case of which the said necessity does not obtain. Yet when one 
of the two contraries is a constitutive property of the subject, as 
it is a constitutive property of fire to be hot, of snow to be white, 
it is necessary determinately that one of the two contraries, not 
one or the other, should be present in the subject; for fire 
cannot be cold, or snow black. Thus, it is not the case here that 
one of the two must needs be present in every subject receptive 
of these qualities, but only in that subject of which the one 
forms a constitutive property. Moreover, in such cases it is one 
member of the pair determinately, and not either the one or the 
other, which must be present. 

In the case of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’, on the other hand, 
neither of the aforesaid statements holds good. For it is not 
necessary that a subject receptive of the qualities should always 
have either the one or the other; that which has not yet 
advanced to the state when sight is natural is not said either to 
be blind or to see. Thus ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’ do not belong 
to that class of contraries which consists of those which have 
no intermediate. On the other hand, they do not belong either to 
that class which consists of contraries which have an 
intermediate. For under certain conditions it is necessary that 
either the one or the other should form part of the constitution 
of every appropriate subject. For when a thing has reached the 


stage when it is by nature capable of sight, it will be said either 
to see or to be blind, and that in an indeterminate sense, 
signifying that the capacity may be either present or absent; for 
it is not necessary either that it should see or that it should be 
blind, but that it should be either in the one state or in the 
other. Yet in the case of those contraries which have an 
intermediate we found that it was never necessary that either 
the one or the other should be present in every appropriate 
subject, but only that in certain subjects one of the pair should 
be present, and that in a determinate sense. It is, therefore, 
plain that ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’ are not opposed each to 
each in either of the senses in which contraries are opposed. 

Again, in the case of contraries, it is possible that there should 
be changes from either into the other, while the subject retains 
its identity, unless indeed one of the contraries is a constitutive 
property of that subject, as heat is of fire. For it is possible that 
that that which is healthy should become diseased, that which 
is white, black, that which is cold, hot, that which is good, bad, 
that which is bad, good. The bad man, if he is being brought into 
a better way of life and thought, may make some advance, 
however slight, and if he should once improve, even ever so 
little, it is plain that he might change completely, or at any rate 
make very great progress; for a man becomes more and more 
easily moved to virtue, however small the improvement was at 
first. It is, therefore, natural to suppose that he will make yet 
greater progress than he has made in the past; and as this 
process goes on, it will change him completely and establish 
him in the contrary state, provided he is not hindered by lack of 
time. In the case of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’, however, change 
in both directions is impossible. There may be a change from 
possession to privation, but not from privation to possession. 
The man who has become blind does not regain his sight; the 
man who has become bald does not regain his hair; the man 
who has lost his teeth does not grow his grow a new set. 


(iv) Statements opposed as affirmation and negation belong 
manifestly to a class which is distinct, for in this case, and in 
this case only, it is necessary for the one opposite to be true and 
the other false. 
Neither in the case of contraries, nor in the case of correlatives, 
nor in the case of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’, is it necessary for 
one to be true and the other false. Health and disease are 
contraries: neither of them is true or false. ‘Double’ and ‘half’ 
are opposed to each other as correlatives: neither of them is 
true or false. The case is the same, of course, with regard to 
‘positives’ and ‘privatives’ such as ‘sight’ and ‘blindness’. In 
short, where there is no sort of combination of words, truth and 
falsity have no place, and all the opposites we have mentioned 
so far consist of simple words. 

At the same time, when the words which enter into opposed 
statements are contraries, these, more than any other set of 
opposites, would seem to claim this characteristic. ‘Socrates is 
ill’ is the contrary of ‘Socrates is well’, but not even of such 
composite expressions is it true to say that one of the pair must 
always be true and the other false. For if Socrates exists, one 
will be true and the other false, but if he does not exist, both 
will be false; for neither ‘Socrates is ill’ nor ‘Socrates is well’ is 
true, if Socrates does not exist at all. 

In the case of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’, if the subject does not 
exist at all, neither proposition is true, but even if the subject 
exists, it is not always the fact that one is true and the other 
false. For ‘Socrates has sight’ is the opposite of ‘Socrates is blind’ 
in the sense of the word ‘opposite’ which applies to possession 
and privation. Now if Socrates exists, it is not necessary that 
one should be true and the other false, for when he is not yet 
able to acquire the power of vision, both are false, as also if 
Socrates is altogether non-existent. 


But in the case of affirmation and negation, whether the subject 
exists or not, one is always false and the other true. For 
manifestly, if Socrates exists, one of the two propositions 
‘Socrates is ill’, ‘Socrates is not ill’, is true, and the other false. 
This is likewise the case if he does not exist; for if he does not 
exist, to say that he is ill is false, to say that he is not ill is true. 
Thus it is in the case of those opposites only, which are opposite 
in the sense in which the term is used with reference to 
affirmation and negation, that the rule holds good, that one of 
the pair must be true and the other false. 

That the contrary of a good is an evil is shown by induction: the 
contrary of health is disease, of courage, cowardice, and so on. 
But the contrary of an evil is sometimes a good, sometimes an 
evil. For defect, which is an evil, has excess for its contrary, this 
also being an evil, and the mean. which is a good, is equally the 
contrary of the one and of the other. It is only in a few cases, 
however, that we see instances of this: in most, the contrary of 
an evil is a good. 

In the case of contraries, it is not always necessary that if one 
exists the other should also exist: for if all become healthy there 
will be health and no disease, and again, if everything turns 
white, there will be white, but no black. Again, since the fact 
that Socrates is ill is the contrary of the fact that Socrates is 
well, and two contrary conditions cannot both obtain in one and 
the same individual at the same time, both these contraries 
could not exist at once: for if that Socrates was well was a fact, 
then that Socrates was ill could not possibly be one. 


It is plain that contrary attributes must needs be present in 
subjects which belong to the same species or genus. Disease 
and health require as their subject the body of an animal; white 
and black require a body, without further qualification; justice 
and injustice require as their subject the human soul. 

Moreover, it is necessary that pairs of contraries should in all 
cases either belong to the same genus or belong to contrary 
genera or be themselves genera. White and black belong to the 
same genus, colour; justice and injustice, to contrary genera, 
virtue and vice; while good and evil do not belong to genera, but 
are themselves actual genera, with terms under them. 

There are four senses in which one thing can be said to be 
‘prior’ to another. Primarily and most properly the term has 
reference to time: in this sense the word is used to indicate that 
one thing is older or more ancient than another, for the 
expressions ‘older’ and ‘more ancient’ imply greater length of 
time. 

Secondly, one thing is said to be ‘prior’ to another when the 
sequence of their being cannot be reversed. In this sense ‘one’ is 
‘prior’ to ‘two’. For if ‘two’ exists, it follows directly that ‘one’ 
must exist, but if ‘one’ exists, it does not follow necessarily that 
‘two’ exists: thus the sequence subsisting cannot be reversed. It 
is agreed, then, that when the sequence of two things cannot be 
reversed, then that one on which the other depends is called 
‘prior’ to that other. 

In the third place, the term ‘prior’ is used with reference to any 
order, as in the case of science and of oratory. For in sciences 


which use demonstration there is that which is prior and that 
which is posterior in order; in geometry, the elements are prior 
to the propositions; in reading and writing, the letters of the 
alphabet are prior to the syllables. Similarly, in the case of 
speeches, the exordium is prior in order to the narrative. 

Besides these senses of the word, there is a fourth. That which 
is better and more honourable is said to have a natural priority. 
In common parlance men speak of those whom they honour 
and love as ‘coming first’ with them. This sense of the word is 
perhaps the most far-fetched. 

Such, then, are the different senses in which the term ‘prior’ is 
used. 

Yet it would seem that besides those mentioned there is yet 
another. For in those things, the being of each of which implies 
that of the other, that which is in any way the cause may 
reasonably be said to be by nature ‘prior’ to the effect. It is plain 
that there are instances of this. The fact of the being of a man 
carries with it the truth of the proposition that he is, and the 
implication is reciprocal: for if a man is, the proposition 
wherein we allege that he is true, and conversely, if the 
proposition wherein we allege that he is true, then he is. The 
true proposition, however, is in no way the cause of the being of 
the man, but the fact of the man’s being does seem somehow to 
be the cause of the truth of the proposition, for the truth or 
falsity of the proposition depends on the fact of the man’s being 
or not being. 

Thus the word ‘prior’ may be used in five senses. 


The term ‘simultaneous’ is primarily and most appropriately 
applied to those things the genesis of the one of which is 
simultaneous with that of the other; for in such cases neither is 
prior or posterior to the other. Such things are said to be 
simultaneous in point of time. Those things, again, are 
‘simultaneous’ in point of nature, the being of each of which 
involves that of the other, while at the same time neither is the 
cause of the other’s being. This is the case with regard to the 
double and the half, for these are reciprocally dependent, since, 
if there is a double, there is also a half, and if there is a half, 
there is also a double, while at the same time neither is the 
cause of the being of the other. 

Again, those species which are distinguished one from another 
and opposed one to another within the same genus are said to 
be ‘simultaneous’ in nature. I mean those species which are 
distinguished each from each by one and the same method of 
division. Thus the ‘winged’ species is simultaneous with the 
‘terrestrial’ and the ‘water’ species. These are distinguished 
within the same genus, and are opposed each to each, for the 
genus ‘animal’ has the ‘winged’, the ‘terrestrial’, and the ‘water’ 
species, and no one of these is prior or posterior to another; on 
the contrary, all such things appear to be ‘simultaneous’ in 
nature. Each of these also, the terrestrial, the winged, and the 
water species, can be divided again into subspecies. Those 
species, then, also will be ‘simultaneous’ point of nature, which, 
belonging to the same genus, are distinguished each from each 
by one and the same method of differentiation. 

But genera are prior to species, for the sequence of their being 
cannot be reversed. If there is the species ‘water-animal’, there 
will be the genus ‘animal’, but granted the being of the genus 


‘animal’, it does not follow necessarily that there will be the 
species ‘water-animal’. 

Those things, therefore, are said to be ‘simultaneous’ in nature, 
the being of each of which involves that of the other, while at 
the same time neither is in any way the cause of the other’s 
being; those species, also, which are distinguished each from 
each and opposed within the same genus. Those things, 
moreover, are ‘simultaneous’ in the unqualified sense of the 
word which come into being at the same time. 

There are six sorts of movement: generation, destruction, 
increase, diminution, alteration, and change of place. 

It is evident in all but one case that all these sorts of movement 
are distinct each from each. Generation is distinct from 
destruction, increase and change of place from diminution, and 
so on. But in the case of alteration it may be argued that the 
process necessarily implies one or other of the other five sorts 
of motion. This is not true, for we may say that all affections, or 
nearly all, produce in us an alteration which is distinct from all 
other sorts of motion, for that which is affected need not suffer 
either increase or diminution or any of the other sorts of 
motion. Thus alteration is a distinct sort of motion; for, if it were 
not, the thing altered would not only be altered, but would 
forthwith necessarily suffer increase or diminution or some one 
of the other sorts of motion in addition; which as a matter of 
fact is not the case. Similarly that which was undergoing the 
process of increase or was subject to some other sort of motion 
would, if alteration were not a distinct form of motion, 
necessarily be subject to alteration also. But there are some 


things which undergo increase but yet not alteration. The 
square, for instance, if a gnomon is applied to it, undergoes 
increase but not alteration, and so it is with all other figures of 
this sort. Alteration and increase, therefore, are distinct. 

Speaking generally, rest is the contrary of motion. But the 
different forms of motion have their own contraries in other 
forms; thus destruction is the contrary of generation, 
diminution of increase, rest in a place, of change of place. As for 
this last, change in the reverse direction would seem to be most 
truly its contrary; thus motion upwards is the contrary of 
motion downwards and vice versa. 

In the case of that sort of motion which yet remains, of those 
that have been enumerated, it is not easy to state what is its 
contrary. It appears to have no contrary, unless one should 
define the contrary here also either as ‘rest in its quality’ or as 
‘change in the direction of the contrary quality’, just as we 
defined the contrary of change of place either as rest in a place 
or as change in the reverse direction. For a thing is altered when 
change of quality takes place; therefore either rest in its quality 
or change in the direction of the contrary may be called the 
contrary of this qualitative form of motion. In this way 
becoming white is the contrary of becoming black; there is 
alteration in the contrary direction, since a change of a 
qualitative nature takes place. 

The term ‘to have’ is used in various senses. In the first place it 
is used with reference to habit or disposition or any other 
quality, for we are said to ‘have’ a piece of knowledge or a virtue. 
Then, again, it has reference to quantity, as, for instance, in the 


case of a man’s height; for he is said to ‘have’ a height of three 
or four cubits. It is used, moreover, with regard to apparel, a 
man being said to ‘have’ a coat or tunic; or in respect of 
something which we have on a part of ourselves, as a ring on 
the hand: or in respect of something which is a part of us, as 
hand or foot. The term refers also to content, as in the case of a 
vessel and wheat, or of a jar and wine; a jar is said to ‘have’ 
wine, and a corn-measure wheat. The expression in such cases 
has reference to content. Or it refers to that which has been 
acquired; we are said to ‘have’ a house or a field. A man is also 
said to ‘have’ a wife, and a wife a husband, and this appears to 
be the most remote meaning of the term, for by the use of it we 
mean simply that the husband lives with the wife. 

Other senses of the word might perhaps be found, but the most 
ordinary ones have all been enumerated. 


Aristotle - On Interpretation 
[Translated by E. M. Edghill] 


First we must define the terms ‘noun’ and ‘verb’, then the terms 
‘denial’ and ‘affirmation’, then ‘proposition’ and ‘sentence.’ 

Spoken words are the symbols of mental experience and 
written words are the symbols of spoken words. Just as all men 
have not the same writing, so all men have not the same 
speech sounds, but the mental experiences, which these 
directly symbolize, are the same for all, as also are those things 
of which our experiences are the images. This matter has, 
however, been discussed in my treatise about the soul, for it 
belongs to an investigation distinct from that which lies before 
us. 

As there are in the mind thoughts which do not involve truth or 
falsity, and also those which must be either true or false, so it is 
in speech. For truth and falsity imply combination and 
separation. Nouns and verbs, provided nothing is added, are 
like thoughts without combination or separation; ‘man’ and 
‘white’, as isolated terms, are not yet either true or false. In 
proof of this, consider the word ‘goat-stag.’ It has significance, 
but there is no truth or falsity about it, unless ‘is’ or ‘is not’ is 
added, either in the present or in some other tense. 


By a noun we mean a sound significant by convention, which 
has no reference to time, and of which no part is significant 
apart from the rest. In the noun ‘Fairsteed,’ the part ‘steed’ has 
no significance in and by itself, as in the phrase ‘fair steed.’ Yet 
there is a difference between simple and composite nouns; for 
in the former the part is in no way significant, in the latter it 
contributes to the meaning of the whole, although it has not an 
independent meaning. Thus in the word ‘pirate-boat’ the word 
‘boat’ has no meaning except as part of the whole word. 

The limitation ‘by convention’ was introduced because nothing 
is by nature a noun or name – it is only so when it becomes a 
symbol; inarticulate sounds, such as those which brutes 
produce, are significant, yet none of these constitutes a noun. 

The expression ‘not-man’ is not a noun. There is indeed no 
recognized term by which we may denote such an expression, 
for it is not a sentence or a denial. Let it then be called an 
indefinite noun. 

The expressions ‘of Philo’, ‘to Philo’, and so on, constitute not 
nouns, but cases of a noun. The definition of these cases of a 
noun is in other respects the same as that of the noun proper, 
but, when coupled with ‘is’, ‘was’, or will be’, they do not, as 
they are, form a proposition either true or false, and this the 
noun proper always does, under these conditions. Take the 
words ‘of Philo is’ or ‘of or ‘of Philo is not’; these words do not, 
as they stand, form either a true or a false proposition. 


A verb is that which, in addition to its proper meaning, carries 
with it the notion of time. No part of it has any independent 
meaning, and it is a sign of something said of something else. 

I will explain what I mean by saying that it carries with it the 
notion of time. ‘Health’ is a noun, but ‘is healthy’ is a verb; for 
besides its proper meaning it indicates the present existence of 
the state in question. 

Moreover, a verb is always a sign of something said of 
something else, i.e. of something either predicable of or present 
in some other thing. 

Such expressions as ‘is not-healthy’, ‘is not, ill’, I do not 
describe as verbs; for though they carry the additional note of 
time, and always form a predicate, there is no specified name 
for this variety; but let them be called indefinite verbs, since 
they apply equally well to that which exists and to that which 
does not. 

Similarly ‘he was healthy’, ‘he will be healthy’, are not verbs, 
but tenses of a verb; the difference lies in the fact that the verb 
indicates present time, while the tenses of the verb indicate 
those times which lie outside the present. 

Verbs in and by themselves are substantival and have 
significance, for he who uses such expressions arrests the 
hearer’s mind, and fixes his attention; but they do not, as they 
stand, express any judgement, either positive or negative. For 
neither are ‘to be’ and ‘not to be’ the participle ‘being’ 
significant of any fact, unless something is added; for they do 
not themselves indicate anything, but imply a copulation, of 
which we cannot form a conception apart from the things 
coupled. 


A sentence is a significant portion of speech, some parts of 
which have an independent meaning, that is to say, as an 
utterance, though not as the expression of any positive 
judgement. Let me explain. The word ‘human’ has meaning, 
but does not constitute a proposition, either positive or 
negative. It is only when other words are added that the whole 
will form an affirmation or denial. But if we separate one 
syllable of the word ‘human’ from the other, it has no meaning; 
similarly in the word ‘mouse’, the part ‘ouse’ has no meaning in 
itself, but is merely a sound. In composite words, indeed, the 
parts contribute to the meaning of the whole; yet, as has been 
pointed out, they have not an independent meaning. 

Every sentence has meaning, not as being the natural means by 
which a physical faculty is realized, but, as we have said, by 
convention. Yet every sentence is not a proposition; only such 
are propositions as have in them either truth or falsity. Thus a 
prayer is a sentence, but is neither true nor false. 

Let us therefore dismiss all other types of sentence but the 
proposition, for this last concerns our present inquiry, whereas 
the investigation of the others belongs rather to the study of 
rhetoric or of poetry. 


The first class of simple propositions is the simple affirmation, 
the next, the simple denial; all others are only one by 
conjunction. 

Every proposition must contain a verb or the tense of a verb. 
The phrase which defines the species ‘man’, if no verb in 
present, past, or future time be added, is not a proposition. It 
may be asked how the expression ‘a footed animal with two 
feet’ can be called single; for it is not the circumstance that the 
words follow in unbroken succession that effects the unity. This 
inquiry, however, finds its place in an investigation foreign to 
that before us. 

We call those propositions single which indicate a single fact, or 
the conjunction of the parts of which results in unity: those 
propositions, on the other hand, are separate and many in 
number, which indicate many facts, or whose parts have no 
conjunction. 

Let us, moreover, consent to call a noun or a verb an expression 
only, and not a proposition, since it is not possible for a man to 
speak in this way when he is expressing something, in such a 
way as to make a statement, whether his utterance is an 
answer to a question or an act of his own initiation. 

To return: of propositions one kind is simple, i.e. that which 
asserts or denies something of something, the other composite, 

i.e. that which is compounded of simple propositions. A simple 
proposition is a statement, with meaning, as to the presence of 
something in a subject or its absence, in the present, past, or 
future, according to the divisions of time. 

An affirmation is a positive assertion of something about 
something, a denial a negative assertion. 

Now it is possible both to affirm and to deny the presence of 
something which is present or of something which is not, and 
since these same affirmations and denials are possible with 
reference to those times which lie outside the present, it would 
be possible to contradict any affirmation or denial. Thus it is 
plain that every affirmation has an opposite denial, and 
similarly every denial an opposite affirmation. 

We will call such a pair of propositions a pair of contradictories. 
Those positive and negative propositions are said to be 
contradictory which have the same subject and predicate. The 
identity of subject and of predicate must not be ‘equivocal’. 
Indeed there are definitive qualifications besides this, which we 
make to meet the casuistries of sophists. 

Some things are universal, others individual. By the term 
‘universal’ I mean that which is of such a nature as to be 
predicated of many subjects, by ‘individual’ that which is not 
thus predicated. Thus ‘man’ is a universal, ‘Callias’ an 
individual. 

Our propositions necessarily sometimes concern a universal 
subject, sometimes an individual. 

If, then, a man states a positive and a negative proposition of 
universal character with regard to a universal, these two 
propositions are ‘contrary’. By the expression ‘a proposition of 


universal character with regard to a universal’, such 
propositions as ‘every man is white’, ‘no man is white’ are 
meant. When, on the other hand, the positive and negative 
propositions, though they have regard to a universal, are yet 
not of universal character, they will not be contrary, albeit the 
meaning intended is sometimes contrary. As instances of 
propositions made with regard to a universal, but not of 
universal character, we may take the ‘propositions ‘man is 
white’, ‘man is not white’. ‘Man’ is a universal, but the 
proposition is not made as of universal character; for the word 
‘every’ does not make the subject a universal, but rather gives 
the proposition a universal character. If, however, both 
predicate and subject are distributed, the proposition thus 
constituted is contrary to truth; no affirmation will, under such 
circumstances, be true. The proposition ‘every man is every 
animal’ is an example of this type. 

An affirmation is opposed to a denial in the sense which I 
denote by the term ‘contradictory’, when, while the subject 
remains the same, the affirmation is of universal character and 
the denial is not. The affirmation ‘every man is white’ is the 
contradictory of the denial ‘not every man is white’, or again, 
the proposition ‘no man is white’ is the contradictory of the 
proposition ‘some men are white’. But propositions are opposed 
as contraries when both the affirmation and the denial are 
universal, as in the sentences ‘every man is white’, ‘no man is 
white’, ‘every man is just’, ‘no man is just’. 

We see that in a pair of this sort both propositions cannot be 
true, but the contradictories of a pair of contraries can 
sometimes both be true with reference to the same subject; for 
instance ‘not every man is white’ and some men are white’ are 
both true. Of such corresponding positive and negative 
propositions as refer to universals and have a universal 
character, one must be true and the other false. This is the case 


also when the reference is to individuals, as in the propositions 
‘Socrates is white’, ‘Socrates is not white’. 

When, on the other hand, the reference is to universals, but the 
propositions are not universal, it is not always the case that one 
is true and the other false, for it is possible to state truly that 
man is white and that man is not white and that man is 
beautiful and that man is not beautiful; for if a man is deformed 
he is the reverse of beautiful, also if he is progressing towards 
beauty he is not yet beautiful. 

This statement might seem at first sight to carry with it a 
contradiction, owing to the fact that the proposition ‘man is not 
white’ appears to be equivalent to the proposition ‘no man is 
white’. This, however, is not the case, nor are they necessarily 
at the same time true or false. 

It is evident also that the denial corresponding to a single 
affirmation is itself single; for the denial must deny just that 
which the affirmation affirms concerning the same subject, and 
must correspond with the affirmation both in the universal or 
particular character of the subject and in the distributed or 
undistributed sense in which it is understood. 

For instance, the affirmation ‘Socrates is white’ has its proper 
denial in the proposition ‘Socrates is not white’. If anything else 
be negatively predicated of the subject or if anything else be the 
subject though the predicate remain the same, the denial will 
not be the denial proper to that affirmation, but on that is 
distinct. 

The denial proper to the affirmation ‘every man is white’ is ‘not 
every man is white’; that proper to the affirmation ‘some men 
are white’ is ‘no man is white’, while that proper to the 
affirmation ‘man is white’ is ‘man is not white’. 


We have shown further that a single denial is contradictorily 
opposite to a single affirmation and we have explained which 
these are; we have also stated that contrary are distinct from 
contradictory propositions and which the contrary are; also that 
with regard to a pair of opposite propositions it is not always 
the case that one is true and the other false. We have pointed 
out, moreover, what the reason of this is and under what 
circumstances the truth of the one involves the falsity of the 
other. 

An affirmation or denial is single, if it indicates some one fact 
about some one subject; it matters not whether the subject is 
universal and whether the statement has a universal character, 
or whether this is not so. Such single propositions are: ‘every 
man is white’, ‘not every man is white’;’man is white’,’man is 
not white’; ‘no man is white’, ‘some men are white’; provided 
the word ‘white’ has one meaning. If, on the other hand, one 
word has two meanings which do not combine to form one, the 
affirmation is not single. For instance, if a man should establish 
the symbol ‘garment’ as significant both of a horse and of a 
man, the proposition ‘garment is white’ would not be a single 
affirmation, nor its opposite a single denial. For it is equivalent 
to the proposition ‘horse and man are white’, which, again, is 
equivalent to the two propositions ‘horse is white’, ‘man is 
white’. If, then, these two propositions have more than a single 
significance, and do not form a single proposition, it is plain 
that the first proposition either has more than one significance 
or else has none; for a particular man is not a horse. 


This, then, is another instance of those propositions of which 
both the positive and the negative forms may be true or false 
simultaneously. 

In the case of that which is or which has taken place, 
propositions, whether positive or negative, must be true or 
false. Again, in the case of a pair of contradictories, either when 
the subject is universal and the propositions are of a universal 
character, or when it is individual, as has been said,’ one of the 
two must be true and the other false; whereas when the subject 
is universal, but the propositions are not of a universal 
character, there is no such necessity. We have discussed this 
type also in a previous chapter. 

When the subject, however, is individual, and that which is 
predicated of it relates to the future, the case is altered. For if all 
propositions whether positive or negative are either true or 
false, then any given predicate must either belong to the subject 
or not, so that if one man affirms that an event of a given 
character will take place and another denies it, it is plain that 
the statement of the one will correspond with reality and that 
of the other will not. For the predicate cannot both belong and 
not belong to the subject at one and the same time with regard 
to the future. 

Thus, if it is true to say that a thing is white, it must necessarily 
be white; if the reverse proposition is true, it will of necessity 
not be white. Again, if it is white, the proposition stating that it 
is white was true; if it is not white, the proposition to the 
opposite effect was true. And if it is not white, the man who 
states that it is making a false statement; and if the man who 


states that it is white is making a false statement, it follows that 
it is not white. It may therefore be argued that it is necessary 
that affirmations or denials must be either true or false. 

Now if this be so, nothing is or takes place fortuitously, either in 
the present or in the future, and there are no real alternatives; 
everything takes place of necessity and is fixed. For either he 
that affirms that it will take place or he that denies this is in 
correspondence with fact, whereas if things did not take place 
of necessity, an event might just as easily not happen as 
happen; for the meaning of the word ‘fortuitous’ with regard to 
present or future events is that reality is so constituted that it 
may issue in either of two opposite directions. Again, if a thing 
is white now, it was true before to say that it would be white, so 
that of anything that has taken place it was always true to say 
‘it is’ or ‘it will be’. But if it was always true to say that a thing is 
or will be, it is not possible that it should not be or not be about 
to be, and when a thing cannot not come to be, it is impossible 
that it should not come to be, and when it is impossible that it 
should not come to be, it must come to be. All, then, that is 
about to be must of necessity take place. It results from this 
that nothing is uncertain or fortuitous, for if it were fortuitous it 
would not be necessary. 

Again, to say that neither the affirmation nor the denial is true, 
maintaining, let us say, that an event neither will take place nor 
will not take place, is to take up a position impossible to defend. 
In the first place, though facts should prove the one proposition 
false, the opposite would still be untrue. Secondly, if it was true 
to say that a thing was both white and large, both these 
qualities must necessarily belong to it; and if they will belong to 
it the next day, they must necessarily belong to it the next day. 
But if an event is neither to take place nor not to take place the 
next day, the element of chance will be eliminated. For 


example, it would be necessary that a sea-fight should neither 
take place nor fail to take place on the next day. 

These awkward results and others of the same kind follow, if it 
is an irrefragable law that of every pair of contradictory 
propositions, whether they have regard to universals and are 
stated as universally applicable, or whether they have regard to 
individuals, one must be true and the other false, and that there 
are no real alternatives, but that all that is or takes place is the 
outcome of necessity. There would be no need to deliberate or 
to take trouble, on the supposition that if we should adopt a 
certain course, a certain result would follow, while, if we did 
not, the result would not follow. For a man may predict an 
event ten thousand years beforehand, and another may predict 
the reverse; that which was truly predicted at the moment in 
the past will of necessity take place in the fullness of time. 

Further, it makes no difference whether people have or have 
not actually made the contradictory statements. For it is 
manifest that the circumstances are not influenced by the fact 
of an affirmation or denial on the part of anyone. For events 
will not take place or fail to take place because it was stated 
that they would or would not take place, nor is this any more 
the case if the prediction dates back ten thousand years or any 
other space of time. Wherefore, if through all time the nature of 
things was so constituted that a prediction about an event was 
true, then through all time it was necessary that that should 
find fulfillment; and with regard to all events, circumstances 
have always been such that their occurrence is a matter of 
necessity. For that of which someone has said truly that it will 
be, cannot fail to take place; and of that which takes place, it 
was always true to say that it would be. 

Yet this view leads to an impossible conclusion; for we see that 
both deliberation and action are causative with regard to the 


future, and that, to speak more generally, in those things which 
are not continuously actual there is potentiality in either 
direction. Such things may either be or not be; events also 
therefore may either take place or not take place. There are 
many obvious instances of this. It is possible that this coat may 
be cut in half, and yet it may not be cut in half, but wear out 
first. In the same way, it is possible that it should not be cut in 
half; unless this were so, it would not be possible that it should 
wear out first. So it is therefore with all other events which 
possess this kind of potentiality. It is therefore plain that it is 
not of necessity that everything is or takes place; but in some 
instances there are real alternatives, in which case the 
affirmation is no more true and no more false than the denial; 
while some exhibit a predisposition and general tendency in 
one direction or the other, and yet can issue in the opposite 
direction by exception. 

Now that which is must needs be when it is, and that which is 
not must needs not be when it is not. Yet it cannot be said 
without qualification that all existence and non-existence is the 
outcome of necessity. For there is a difference between saying 
that that which is, when it is, must needs be, and simply saying 
that all that is must needs be, and similarly in the case of that 
which is not. In the case, also, of two contradictory propositions 
this holds good. Everything must either be or not be, whether in 
the present or in the future, but it is not always possible to 
distinguish and state determinately which of these alternatives 
must necessarily come about. 

Let me illustrate. A sea-fight must either take place to-morrow 
or not, but it is not necessary that it should take place tomorrow, 
neither is it necessary that it should not take place, yet 
it is necessary that it either should or should not take place tomorrow. 
Since propositions correspond with facts, it is evident 
that when in future events there is a real alternative, and a 


potentiality in contrary directions, the corresponding 
affirmation and denial have the same character. 

This is the case with regard to that which is not always existent 
or not always nonexistent. One of the two propositions in such 
instances must be true and the other false, but we cannot say 
determinately that this or that is false, but must leave the 
alternative undecided. One may indeed be more likely to be true 
than the other, but it cannot be either actually true or actually 
false. It is therefore plain that it is not necessary that of an 
affirmation and a denial one should be true and the other false. 
For in the case of that which exists potentially, but not actually, 
the rule which applies to that which exists actually does not 
hold good. The case is rather as we have indicated. 

An affirmation is the statement of a fact with regard to a 
subject, and this subject is either a noun or that which has no 
name; the subject and predicate in an affirmation must each 
denote a single thing. I have already explained’ what is meant 
by a noun and by that which has no name; for I stated that the 
expression ‘not-man’ was not a noun, in the proper sense of the 
word, but an indefinite noun, denoting as it does in a certain 
sense a single thing. Similarly the expression ‘does not enjoy 
health’ is not a verb proper, but an indefinite verb. Every 
affirmation, then, and every denial, will consist of a noun and a 
verb, either definite or indefinite. 

There can be no affirmation or denial without a verb; for the 
expressions ‘is’, ‘will be’, ‘was’, ‘is coming to be’, and the like 
are verbs according to our definition, since besides their specific 
meaning they convey the notion of time. Thus the primary 


affirmation and denial are ‘as follows: ‘man is’, ‘man is not’. 
Next to these, there are the propositions: ‘not-man is’, ‘not-man 
is not’. Again we have the propositions: ‘every man is, ‘every 
man is not’, ‘all that is not-man is’, ‘all that is not-man is not’. 
The same classification holds good with regard to such periods 
of time as lie outside the present. 

When the verb ‘is’ is used as a third element in the sentence, 
there can be positive and negative propositions of two sorts. 
Thus in the sentence ‘man is just’ the verb ‘is’ is used as a third 
element, call it verb or noun, which you will. Four propositions, 
therefore, instead of two can be formed with these materials. 
Two of the four, as regards their affirmation and denial, 
correspond in their logical sequence with the propositions 
which deal with a condition of privation; the other two do not 
correspond with these. 

I mean that the verb ‘is’ is added either to the term ‘just’ or to 
the term ‘not-just’, and two negative propositions are formed in 
the same way. Thus we have the four propositions. Reference to 
the subjoined table will make matters clear: 

A. Affirmation B. Denial 
Man is just Man is not just 

D. Denial C. Affirmation 
Man is not not-justMan is not-just 

Here 'is' and 'is not' are added either to 'just' or to 'not-just'. 



This then is the proper scheme for these propositions, as has 
been said in the Analytics. The same rule holds good, if the 
subject is distributed. Thus we have the table: 

A’. Affirmation B’. Denial 
Every man is just Not every man 
is just 

D’. Denial 
C’. Affirmation 

Not every man is Every man is 
not-just not-just 

Yet here it is not possible, in the same way as in the former 
case, that the propositions joined in the table by a diagonal line 
should both be true; though under certain circumstances this is 
the case. 

We have thus set out two pairs of opposite propositions; there 
are moreover two other pairs, if a term be conjoined with 'notman', 
the latter forming a kind of subject. Thus: 

A”. Not-man is just 
B”. Not-man is not 
just 

D”. Not-man is not C”. Not-man is notnot-
just just 


This is an exhaustive enumeration of all the pairs of opposite 
propositions that can possibly be framed. This last group should 
remain distinct from those which preceded it, since it employs 
as its subject the expression ‘not-man’. 

When the verb ‘is’ does not fit the structure of the sentence (for 
instance, when the verbs ‘walks’, ‘enjoys health’ are used), that 
scheme applies, which applied when the word ‘is’ was added. 

Thus we have the propositions: ‘every man enjoys health’, 
‘every man does-not-enjoy-health’, ‘all that is not-man enjoys 
health’, ‘all that is not-man does-not-enjoy-health’. We must 
not in these propositions use the expression ‘not every man’. 
The negative must be attached to the word ‘man’, for the word 
‘every’ does not give to the subject a universal significance, but 
implies that, as a subject, it is distributed. This is plain from the 
following pairs: ‘man enjoys health’, ‘man does not enjoy 
health’; ‘not-man enjoys health’, ‘not man does not enjoy 
health’. These propositions differ from the former in being 
indefinite and not universal in character. Thus the adjectives 
‘every’ and no additional significance except that the subject, 
whether in a positive or in a negative sentence, is distributed. 
The rest of the sentence, therefore, will in each case be the 
same. 

Since the contrary of the proposition ‘every animal is just’ is ‘no 
animal is just’, it is plain that these two propositions will never 
both be true at the same time or with reference to the same 
subject. Sometimes, however, the contradictories of these 
contraries will both be true, as in the instance before us: the 
propositions ‘not every animal is just’ and ‘some animals are 
just’ are both true. 


Further, the proposition ‘no man is just’ follows from the 
proposition ‘every man is not just’ and the proposition ‘not 
every man is not just’, which is the opposite of ‘every man is 
not-just’, follows from the proposition ‘some men are just’; for 
if this be true, there must be some just men. 

It is evident, also, that when the subject is individual, if a 
question is asked and the negative answer is the true one, a 
certain positive proposition is also true. Thus, if the question 
were asked Socrates wise?’ and the negative answer were the 
true one, the positive inference ‘Then Socrates is unwise’ is 
correct. But no such inference is correct in the case of 
universals, but rather a negative proposition. For instance, if to 
the question ‘Is every man wise?’ the answer is ‘no’, the 
inference ‘Then every man is unwise’ is false. But under these 
circumstances the inference ‘Not every man is wise’ is correct. 
This last is the contradictory, the former the contrary. Negative 
expressions, which consist of an indefinite noun or predicate, 
such as ‘not-man’ or ‘not-just’, may seem to be denials 
containing neither noun nor verb in the proper sense of the 
words. But they are not. For a denial must always be either true 
or false, and he that uses the expression ‘not man’, if nothing 
more be added, is not nearer but rather further from making a 
true or a false statement than he who uses the expression 
‘man’. 

The propositions ‘everything that is not man is just’, and the 
contradictory of this, are not equivalent to any of the other 
propositions; on the other hand, the proposition ‘everything 
that is not man is not just’ is equivalent to the proposition 
‘nothing that is not man is just’. 

The conversion of the position of subject and predicate in a 
sentence involves no difference in its meaning. Thus we say 
‘man is white’ and ‘white is man’. If these were not equivalent, 


there would be more than one contradictory to the same 
proposition, whereas it has been demonstrated’ that each 
proposition has one proper contradictory and one only. For of 
the proposition ‘man is white’ the appropriate contradictory is 
‘man is not white’, and of the proposition ‘white is man’, if its 
meaning be different, the contradictory will either be ‘white is 
not not-man’ or ‘white is not man’. Now the former of these is 
the contradictory of the proposition ‘white is not-man’, and the 
latter of these is the contradictory of the proposition ‘man is 
white’; thus there will be two contradictories to one 
proposition. 

It is evident, therefore, that the inversion of the relative 
position of subject and predicate does not affect the sense of 
affirmations and denials. 

There is no unity about an affirmation or denial which, either 
positively or negatively, predicates one thing of many subjects, 
or many things of the same subject, unless that which is 
indicated by the many is really some one thing. do not apply 
this word ‘one’ to those things which, though they have a single 
recognized name, yet do not combine to form a unity. Thus, 
man may be an animal, and biped, and domesticated, but these 
three predicates combine to form a unity. On the other hand, 
the predicates ‘white’, ‘man’, and ‘walking’ do not thus 
combine. Neither, therefore, if these three form the subject of 
an affirmation, nor if they form its predicate, is there any unity 
about that affirmation. In both cases the unity is linguistic, but 
not real. 


If therefore the dialectical question is a request for an answer, 

i.e. either for the admission of a premiss or for the admission of 
one of two contradictories – and the premiss is itself always one 
of two contradictories – the answer to such a question as 
contains the above predicates cannot be a single proposition. 
For as I have explained in the Topics, question is not a single 
one, even if the answer asked for is true. 
At the same time it is plain that a question of the form ‘what is 
it?’ is not a dialectical question, for a dialectical questioner 
must by the form of his question give his opponent the chance 
of announcing one of two alternatives, whichever he wishes. He 
must therefore put the question into a more definite form, and 
inquire, e.g.. whether man has such and such a characteristic or 
not. 

Some combinations of predicates are such that the separate 
predicates unite to form a single predicate. Let us consider 
under what conditions this is and is not possible. We may 
either state in two separate propositions that man is an animal 
and that man is a biped, or we may combine the two, and state 
that man is an animal with two feet. Similarly we may use 
‘man’ and ‘white’ as separate predicates, or unite them into 
one. Yet if a man is a shoemaker and is also good, we cannot 
construct a composite proposition and say that he is a good 
shoemaker. For if, whenever two separate predicates truly 
belong to a subject, it follows that the predicate resulting from 
their combination also truly belongs to the subject, many 
absurd results ensue. For instance, a man is man and white. 
Therefore, if predicates may always be combined, he is a white 
man. Again, if the predicate ‘white’ belongs to him, then the 
combination of that predicate with the former composite 
predicate will be permissible. Thus it will be right to say that he 
is a white man so on indefinitely. Or, again, we may combine 
the predicates ‘musical’, ‘white’, and ‘walking’, and these may 


be combined many times. Similarly we may say that Socrates is 
Socrates and a man, and that therefore he is the man Socrates, 
or that Socrates is a man and a biped, and that therefore he is a 
two-footed man. Thus it is manifest that if man states 
unconditionally that predicates can always be combined, many 
absurd consequences ensue. 

We will now explain what ought to be laid down. 

Those predicates, and terms forming the subject of predication, 
which are accidental either to the same subject or to one 
another, do not combine to form a unity. Take the proposition 
‘man is white of complexion and musical’. Whiteness and being 
musical do not coalesce to form a unity, for they belong only 
accidentally to the same subject. Nor yet, if it were true to say 
that that which is white is musical, would the terms ‘musical’ 
and ‘white’ form a unity, for it is only incidentally that that 
which is musical is white; the combination of the two will, 
therefore, not form a unity. 

Thus, again, whereas, if a man is both good and a shoemaker, 
we cannot combine the two propositions and say simply that he 
is a good shoemaker, we are, at the same time, able to combine 
the predicates ‘animal’ and ‘biped’ and say that a man is an 
animal with two feet, for these predicates are not accidental. 

Those predicates, again, cannot form a unity, of which the one 
is implicit in the other: thus we cannot combine the predicate 
‘white’ again and again with that which already contains the 
notion ‘white’, nor is it right to call a man an animal-man or a 
two-footed man; for the notions ‘animal’ and ‘biped’ are 
implicit in the word ‘man’. On the other hand, it is possible to 
predicate a term simply of any one instance, and to say that 
some one particular man is a man or that some one white man 
is a white man. 


Yet this is not always possible: indeed, when in the adjunct 
there is some opposite which involves a contradiction, the 
predication of the simple term is impossible. Thus it is not right 
to call a dead man a man. When, however, this is not the case, 
it is not impossible. 

Yet the facts of the case might rather be stated thus: when 
some such opposite elements are present, resolution is never 
possible, but when they are not present, resolution is 
nevertheless not always possible. Take the proposition ‘Homer 
is so-and-so’, say ‘a poet’; does it follow that Homer is, or does 
it not? The verb ‘is’ is here used of Homer only incidentally, the 
proposition being that Homer is a poet, not that he is, in the 
independent sense of the word. 

Thus, in the case of those predications which have within them 
no contradiction when the nouns are expanded into definitions, 
and wherein the predicates belong to the subject in their own 
proper sense and not in any indirect way, the individual may be 
the subject of the simple propositions as well as of the 
composite. But in the case of that which is not, it is not true to 
say that because it is the object of opinion, it is; for the opinion 
held about it is that it is not, not that it is. 

As these distinctions have been made, we must consider the 
mutual relation of those affirmations and denials which assert 
or deny possibility or contingency, impossibility or necessity: 
for the subject is not without difficulty. 

We admit that of composite expressions those are contradictory 
each to each which have the verb ‘to be’ its positive and 


negative form respectively. Thus the contradictory of the 
proposition ‘man is’ is ‘man is not’, not ‘not-man is’, and the 
contradictory of ‘man is white’ is ‘man is not white’, not ‘man is 
not-white’. For otherwise, since either the positive or the 
negative proposition is true of any subject, it will turn out true 
to say that a piece of wood is a man that is not white. 

Now if this is the case, in those propositions which do not 
contain the verb ‘to be’ the verb which takes its place will 
exercise the same function. Thus the contradictory of ‘man 
walks’ is ‘man does not walk’, not ‘not-man walks’; for to say 
‘man walks’ merely equivalent to saying ‘man is walking’. 

If then this rule is universal, the contradictory of ‘it may be’ is 
may not be’, not ‘it cannot be’. 

Now it appears that the same thing both may and may not be; 
for instance, everything that may be cut or may walk may also 
escape cutting and refrain from walking; and the reason is that 
those things that have potentiality in this sense are not always 
actual. In such cases, both the positive and the negative 
propositions will be true; for that which is capable of walking or 
of being seen has also a potentiality in the opposite direction. 

But since it is impossible that contradictory propositions should 
both be true of the same subject, it follows that’ it may not be’ 
is not the contradictory of ‘it may be’. For it is a logical 
consequence of what we have said, either that the same 
predicate can be both applicable and inapplicable to one and 
the same subject at the same time, or that it is not by the 
addition of the verbs ‘be’ and ‘not be’, respectively, that positive 
and negative propositions are formed. If the former of these 
alternatives must be rejected, we must choose the latter. 

The contradictory, then, of ‘it may be’ is ‘it cannot be’. The 
same rule applies to the proposition ‘it is contingent that it 


should be’; the contradictory of this is ‘it is not contingent that 
it should be’. The similar propositions, such as ‘it is necessary’ 
and ‘it is impossible’, may be dealt with in the same manner. 
For it comes about that just as in the former instances the verbs 
‘is’ and ‘is not’ were added to the subject-matter of the 
sentence ‘white’ and ‘man’, so here ‘that it should be’ and ‘that 
it should not be’ are the subject-matter and ‘is possible’, ‘is 
contingent’, are added. These indicate that a certain thing is or 
is not possible, just as in the former instances ‘is’ and ‘is not’ 
indicated that certain things were or were not the case. 

The contradictory, then, of ‘it may not be’ is not ‘it cannot be’, 
but ‘it cannot not be’, and the contradictory of ‘it may be’ is not 
‘it may not be’, but cannot be’. Thus the propositions ‘it may be’ 
and ‘it may not be’ appear each to imply the other: for, since 
these two propositions are not contradictory, the same thing 
both may and may not be. But the propositions ‘it may be’ and 
‘it cannot be’ can never be true of the same subject at the same 
time, for they are contradictory. Nor can the propositions ‘it 
may not be’ and ‘it cannot not be’ be at once true of the same 
subject. 

The propositions which have to do with necessity are governed 
by the same principle. The contradictory of ‘it is necessary that 
it should be’, is not ‘it is necessary that it should not be,’ but ‘it 
is not necessary that it should be’, and the contradictory of ‘it is 
necessary that it should not be’ is ‘it is not necessary that it 
should not be’. 

Again, the contradictory of ‘it is impossible that it should be’ is 
not ‘it is impossible that it should not be’ but ‘it is not 
impossible that it should be’, and the contradictory of ‘it is 
impossible that it should not be’ is ‘it is not impossible that it 
should not be’. 


To generalize, we must, as has been stated, define the clauses 
‘that it should be’ and ‘that it should not be’ as the subject-
matter of the propositions, and in making these terms into 
affirmations and denials we must combine them with ‘that it 
should be’ and ‘that it should not be’ respectively. 

We must consider the following pairs as contradictory 
propositions: 

It may be.It cannot be. 

It is contingent.It is not contingent. 

It is impossible.It is not impossible. 

It is necessary.It is not necessary. 

It is true.It is not true. 

Logical sequences follow in due course when we have arranged 
the propositions thus. From the proposition ‘it may be’ it 
follows that it is contingent, and the relation is reciprocal. It 
follows also that it is not impossible and not necessary. 

From the proposition ‘it may not be’ or ‘it is contingent that it 
should not be’ it follows that it is not necessary that it should 
not be and that it is not impossible that it should not be. From 
the proposition ‘it cannot be’ or ‘it is not contingent’ it follows 
that it is necessary that it should not be and that it is 
impossible that it should be. From the proposition ‘it cannot not 
be’ or ‘it is not contingent that it should not be’ it follows that it 


is necessary that it should be and that it is impossible that it 
should not be. 

Let us consider these statements by the help of a table: 

A. 
It may be. 
It is contingent. 
It is not impossible that it 
should be. 
It is not necessary that it 
should be. 


C. 
It may not be. 
It is contingent that it should 
not be. 

It is not impossible that it 
should not be. 
It is not necessary that it 

should not be. 

B. 
It cannot be. 
It is not contingent. 
It is impossible that it should 
be. 
It is necessary that it should 
not be. 


D. 
It cannot not be. 
It is not contingent that it 
should not be. 

It is impossible that it should 
not be. 
It is necessary that it should 

be. 

Now the propositions ‘it is impossible that it should be’ and ‘it 
is not impossible that it should be’ are consequent upon the 
propositions ‘it may be’, ‘it is contingent’, and ‘it cannot be’, ‘it 
is not contingent’, the contradictories upon the contradictories. 


But there is inversion. The negative of the proposition ‘it is 
impossible’ is consequent upon the proposition ‘it may be’ and 
the corresponding positive in the first case upon the negative in 
the second. For ‘it is impossible’ is a positive proposition and ‘it 
is not impossible’ is negative. 

We must investigate the relation subsisting between these 
propositions and those which predicate necessity. That there is 
a distinction is clear. In this case, contrary propositions follow 
respectively from contradictory propositions, and the 
contradictory propositions belong to separate sequences. For 
the proposition ‘it is not necessary that it should be’ is not the 
negative of ‘it is necessary that it should not be’, for both these 
propositions may be true of the same subject; for when it is 
necessary that a thing should not be, it is not necessary that it 
should be. The reason why the propositions predicating 
necessity do not follow in the same kind of sequence as the 
rest, lies in the fact that the proposition ‘it is impossible’ is 
equivalent, when used with a contrary subject, to the 
proposition ‘it is necessary’. For when it is impossible that a 
thing should be, it is necessary, not that it should be, but that it 
should not be, and when it is impossible that a thing should not 
be, it is necessary that it should be. Thus, if the propositions 
predicating impossibility or non-impossibility follow without 
change of subject from those predicating possibility or non-
possibility, those predicating necessity must follow with the 
contrary subject; for the propositions ‘it is impossible’ and ‘it is 
necessary’ are not equivalent, but, as has been said, inversely 
connected. 

Yet perhaps it is impossible that the contradictory propositions 
predicating necessity should be thus arranged. For when it is 
necessary that a thing should be, it is possible that it should be. 
(For if not, the opposite follows, since one or the other must 
follow; so, if it is not possible, it is impossible, and it is thus 


impossible that a thing should be, which must necessarily be; 
which is absurd.) 

Yet from the proposition ‘it may be’ it follows that it is not 
impossible, and from that it follows that it is not necessary; it 
comes about therefore that the thing which must necessarily be 
need not be; which is absurd. But again, the proposition ‘it is 
necessary that it should be’ does not follow from the 
proposition ‘it may be’, nor does the proposition ‘it is necessary 
that it should not be’. For the proposition ‘it may be’ implies a 
twofold possibility, while, if either of the two former 
propositions is true, the twofold possibility vanishes. For if a 
thing may be, it may also not be, but if it is necessary that it 
should be or that it should not be, one of the two alternatives 
will be excluded. It remains, therefore, that the proposition ‘it is 
not necessary that it should not be’ follows from the 
proposition ‘it may be’. For this is true also of that which must 
necessarily be. 

Moreover the proposition ‘it is not necessary that it should not 
be’ is the contradictory of that which follows from the 
proposition ‘it cannot be’; for ‘it cannot be’ is followed by ‘it is 
impossible that it should be’ and by ‘it is necessary that it 
should not be’, and the contradictory of this is the proposition 
‘it is not necessary that it should not be’. Thus in this case also 
contradictory propositions follow contradictory in the way 
indicated, and no logical impossibilities occur when they are 
thus arranged. 

It may be questioned whether the proposition ‘it may be’ 
follows from the proposition ‘it is necessary that it should be’. If 
not, the contradictory must follow, namely that it cannot be, or, 
if a man should maintain that this is not the contradictory, then 
the proposition ‘it may not be’. 


Now both of these are false of that which necessarily is. At the 
same time, it is thought that if a thing may be cut it may also 
not be cut, if a thing may be it may also not be, and thus it 
would follow that a thing which must necessarily be may 
possibly not be; which is false. It is evident, then, that it is not 
always the case that that which may be or may walk possesses 
also a potentiality in the other direction. There are exceptions. 
In the first place we must except those things which possess a 
potentiality not in accordance with a rational principle, as fire 
possesses the potentiality of giving out heat, that is, an 
irrational capacity. Those potentialities which involve a rational 
principle are potentialities of more than one result, that is, of 
contrary results; those that are irrational are not always thus 
constituted. As I have said, fire cannot both heat and not heat, 
neither has anything that is always actual any twofold 
potentiality. Yet some even of those potentialities which are 
irrational admit of opposite results. However, thus much has 
been said to emphasize the truth that it is not every potentiality 
which admits of opposite results, even where the word is used 
always in the same sense. 

But in some cases the word is used equivocally. For the term 
‘possible’ is ambiguous, being used in the one case with 
reference to facts, to that which is actualized, as when a man is 
said to find walking possible because he is actually walking, 
and generally when a capacity is predicated because it is 
actually realized; in the other case, with reference to a state in 
which realization is conditionally practicable, as when a man is 
said to find walking possible because under certain conditions 
he would walk. This last sort of potentiality belongs only to that 
which can be in motion, the former can exist also in the case of 
that which has not this power. Both of that which is walking 
and is actual, and of that which has the capacity though not 
necessarily realized, it is true to say that it is not impossible 
that it should walk (or, in the other case, that it should be), but 


while we cannot predicate this latter kind of potentiality of that 
which is necessary in the unqualified sense of the word, we can 
predicate the former. 

Our conclusion, then, is this: that since the universal is 
consequent upon the particular, that which is necessary is also 
possible, though not in every sense in which the word may be 
used. 

We may perhaps state that necessity and its absence are the 
initial principles of existence and non-existence, and that all 
else must be regarded as posterior to these. 

It is plain from what has been said that that which is of 
necessity is actual. Thus, if that which is eternal is prior, 
actuality also is prior to potentiality. Some things are actualities 
without potentiality, namely, the primary substances; a second 
class consists of those things which are actual but also 
potential, whose actuality is in nature prior to their potentiality, 
though posterior in time; a third class comprises those things 
which are never actualized, but are pure potentialities. 

The question arises whether an affirmation finds its contrary in 
a denial or in another affirmation; whether the proposition 
‘every man is just’ finds its contrary in the proposition ‘no man 
is just’, or in the proposition ‘every man is unjust’. Take the 
propositions ‘Callias is just’, ‘Callias is not just’, ‘Callias is 
unjust’; we have to discover which of these form contraries. 

Now if the spoken word corresponds with the judgement of the 
mind, and if, in thought, that judgement is the contrary of 


another, which pronounces a contrary fact, in the way, for 
instance, in which the judgement ‘every man is just’ 
pronounces a contrary to that pronounced by the judgement 
‘every man is unjust’, the same must needs hold good with 
regard to spoken affirmations. 

But if, in thought, it is not the judgement which pronounces a 
contrary fact that is the contrary of another, then one 
affirmation will not find its contrary in another, but rather in 
the corresponding denial. We must therefore consider which 
true judgement is the contrary of the false, that which forms 
the denial of the false judgement or that which affirms the 
contrary fact. 

Let me illustrate. There is a true judgement concerning that 
which is good, that it is good; another, a false judgement, that it 
is not good; and a third, which is distinct, that it is bad. Which 
of these two is contrary to the true? And if they are one and the 
same, which mode of expression forms the contrary? 

It is an error to suppose that judgements are to be defined as 
contrary in virtue of the fact that they have contrary subjects; 
for the judgement concerning a good thing, that it is good, and 
that concerning a bad thing, that it is bad, may be one and the 
same, and whether they are so or not, they both represent the 
truth. Yet the subjects here are contrary. But judgements are 
not contrary because they have contrary subjects, but because 
they are to the contrary effect. 

Now if we take the judgement that that which is good is good, 
and another that it is not good, and if there are at the same 
time other attributes, which do not and cannot belong to the 
good, we must nevertheless refuse to treat as the contraries of 
the true judgement those which opine that some other attribute 
subsists which does not subsist, as also those that opine that 


some other attribute does not subsist which does subsist, for 
both these classes of judgement are of unlimited content. 

Those judgements must rather be termed contrary to the true 
judgements, in which error is present. Now these judgements 
are those which are concerned with the starting points of 
generation, and generation is the passing from one extreme to 
its opposite; therefore error is a like transition. 

Now that which is good is both good and not bad. The first 
quality is part of its essence, the second accidental; for it is by 
accident that it is not bad. But if that true judgement is most 
really true, which concerns the subject’s intrinsic nature, then 
that false judgement likewise is most really false, which 
concerns its intrinsic nature. Now the judgement that that is 
good is not good is a false judgement concerning its intrinsic 
nature, the judgement that it is bad is one concerning that 
which is accidental. Thus the judgement which denies the true 
judgement is more really false than that which positively 
asserts the presence of the contrary quality. But it is the man 
who forms that judgement which is contrary to the true who is 
most thoroughly deceived, for contraries are among the things 
which differ most widely within the same class. If then of the 
two judgements one is contrary to the true judgement, but that 
which is contradictory is the more truly contrary, then the 
latter, it seems, is the real contrary. The judgement that that 
which is good is bad is composite. For presumably the man who 
forms that judgement must at the same time understand that 
that which is good is not good. 

Further, the contradictory is either always the contrary or 
never; therefore, if it must necessarily be so in all other cases, 
our conclusion in the case just dealt with would seem to be 
correct. Now where terms have no contrary, that judgement is 
false, which forms the negative of the true; for instance, he who 


thinks a man is not a man forms a false judgement. If then in 
these cases the negative is the contrary, then the principle is 
universal in its application. 

Again, the judgement that that which is not good is not good is 
parallel with the judgement that that which is good is good. 
Besides these there is the judgement that that which is good is 
not good, parallel with the judgement that that that is not good 
is good. Let us consider, therefore, what would form the 
contrary of the true judgement that that which is not good is 
not good. The judgement that it is bad would, of course, fail to 
meet the case, since two true judgements are never contrary 
and this judgement might be true at the same time as that with 
which it is connected. For since some things which are not good 
are bad, both judgements may be true. Nor is the judgement 
that it is not bad the contrary, for this too might be true, since 
both qualities might be predicated of the same subject. It 
remains, therefore, that of the judgement concerning that 
which is not good, that it is not good, the contrary judgement is 
that it is good; for this is false. In the same way, moreover, the 
judgement concerning that which is good, that it is not good, is 
the contrary of the judgement that it is good. 

It is evident that it will make no difference if we universalize 
the positive judgement, for the universal negative judgement 
will form the contrary. For instance, the contrary of the 
judgement that everything that is good is good is that nothing 
that is good is good. For the judgement that that which is good 
is good, if the subject be understood in a universal sense, is 
equivalent to the judgement that whatever is good is good, and 
this is identical with the judgement that everything that is good 
is good. We may deal similarly with judgements concerning 
that which is not good. 


If therefore this is the rule with judgements, and if spoken 
affirmations and denials are judgements expressed in words, it 
is plain that the universal denial is the contrary of the 
affirmation about the same subject. Thus the propositions 
‘everything good is good’, ‘every man is good’, have for their 
contraries the propositions ‘nothing good is good’, ‘no man is 
good’. The contradictory propositions, on the other hand, are 
‘not everything good is good’, ‘not every man is good’. 

It is evident, also, that neither true judgements nor true 
propositions can be contrary the one to the other. For whereas, 
when two propositions are true, a man may state both at the 
same time without inconsistency, contrary propositions are 
those which state contrary conditions, and contrary conditions 
cannot subsist at one and the same time in the same subject. 


Aristotle - Prior Analytics 
[Translated by A. J. Jenkinson] 


Book I 

We must first state the subject of our inquiry and the faculty to 
which it belongs: its subject is demonstration and the faculty 
that carries it out demonstrative science. We must next define a 
premiss, a term, and a syllogism, and the nature of a perfect 
and of an imperfect syllogism; and after that, the inclusion or 
noninclusion of one term in another as in a whole, and what we 
mean by predicating one term of all, or none, of another. 

A premiss then is a sentence affirming or denying one thing of 
another. This is either universal or particular or indefinite. By 
universal I mean the statement that something belongs to all or 
none of something else; by particular that it belongs to some or 
not to some or not to all; by indefinite that it does or does not 
belong, without any mark to show whether it is universal or 
particular, e.g. ‘contraries are subjects of the same science’, or 
‘pleasure is not good’. The demonstrative premiss differs from 
the dialectical, because the demonstrative premiss is the 
assertion of one of two contradictory statements (the 
demonstrator does not ask for his premiss, but lays it down), 
whereas the dialectical premiss depends on the adversary’s 
choice between two contradictories. But this will make no 
difference to the production of a syllogism in either case; for 
both the demonstrator and the dialectician argue syllogistically 
after stating that something does or does not belong to 


something else. Therefore a syllogistic premiss without 
qualification will be an affirmation or denial of something 
concerning something else in the way we have described; it will 
be demonstrative, if it is true and obtained through the first 
principles of its science; while a dialectical premiss is the giving 
of a choice between two contradictories, when a man is 
proceeding by question, but when he is syllogizing it is the 
assertion of that which is apparent and generally admitted, as 
has been said in the Topics. The nature then of a premiss and 
the difference between syllogistic, demonstrative, and 
dialectical premisses, may be taken as sufficiently defined by us 
in relation to our present need, but will be stated accurately in 
the sequel. 

I call that a term into which the premiss is resolved, i.e. both the 
predicate and that of which it is predicated, ‘being’ being added 
and ‘not being’ removed, or vice versa. 

A syllogism is discourse in which, certain things being stated, 
something other than what is stated follows of necessity from 
their being so. I mean by the last phrase that they produce the 
consequence, and by this, that no further term is required from 
without in order to make the consequence necessary. 

I call that a perfect syllogism which needs nothing other than 
what has been stated to make plain what necessarily follows; a 
syllogism is imperfect, if it needs either one or more 
propositions, which are indeed the necessary consequences of 
the terms set down, but have not been expressly stated as 
premisses. 

That one term should be included in another as in a whole is 
the same as for the other to be predicated of all of the first. And 
we say that one term is predicated of all of another, whenever 
no instance of the subject can be found of which the other term 


cannot be asserted: ‘to be predicated of none’ must be 
understood in the same way. 

Every premiss states that something either is or must be or may 
be the attribute of something else; of premisses of these three 
kinds some are affirmative, others negative, in respect of each 
of the three modes of attribution; again some affirmative and 
negative premisses are universal, others particular, others 
indefinite. It is necessary then that in universal attribution the 
terms of the negative premiss should be convertible, e.g. if no 
pleasure is good, then no good will be pleasure; the terms of the 
affirmative must be convertible, not however, universally, but in 
part, e.g. if every pleasure,is good, some good must be pleasure; 
the particular affirmative must convert in part (for if some 
pleasure is good, then some good will be pleasure); but the 
particular negative need not convert, for if some animal is not 
man, it does not follow that some man is not animal. 

First then take a universal negative with the terms A and B. If no 
B is A, neither can any A be B. For if some A (say C) were B, it 
would not be true that no B is A; for C is a B. But if every B is A 
then some A is B. For if no A were B, then no B could be A. But 
we assumed that every B is A. Similarly too, if the premiss is 
particular. For if some B is A, then some of the As must be B. For 
if none were, then no B would be A. But if some B is not A, there 
is no necessity that some of the As should not be B; e.g. let B 
stand for animal and A for man. Not every animal is a man; but 
every man is an animal. 


The same manner of conversion will hold good also in respect 
of necessary premisses. The universal negative converts 
universally; each of the affirmatives converts into a particular. If 
it is necessary that no B is A, it is necessary also that no A is B. 
For if it is possible that some A is B, it would be possible also 
that some B is A. If all or some B is A of necessity, it is necessary 
also that some A is B: for if there were no necessity, neither 
would some of the Bs be A necessarily. But the particular 
negative does not convert, for the same reason which we have 
already stated. 

In respect of possible premisses, since possibility is used in 
several senses (for we say that what is necessary and what is 
not necessary and what is potential is possible), affirmative 
statements will all convert in a manner similar to those 
described. For if it is possible that all or some B is A, it will be 
possible that some A is B. For if that were not possible, then no 
B could possibly be A. This has been already proved. But in 
negative statements the case is different. Whatever is said to be 
possible, either because B necessarily is A, or because B is not 
necessarily A, admits of conversion like other negative 
statements, e.g. if one should say, it is possible that man is not 
horse, or that no garment is white. For in the former case the 
one term necessarily does not belong to the other; in the latter 
there is no necessity that it should: and the premiss converts 
like other negative statements. For if it is possible for no man to 
be a horse, it is also admissible for no horse to be a man; and if 
it is admissible for no garment to be white, it is also admissible 
for nothing white to be a garment. For if any white thing must 
be a garment, then some garment will necessarily be white. This 
has been already proved. The particular negative also must be 


treated like those dealt with above. But if anything is said to be 
possible because it is the general rule and natural (and it is in 
this way we define the possible), the negative premisses can no 
longer be converted like the simple negatives; the universal 
negative premiss does not convert, and the particular does. This 
will be plain when we speak about the possible. At present we 
may take this much as clear in addition to what has been said: 
the statement that it is possible that no B is A or some B is not A 
is affirmative in form: for the expression ‘is possible’ ranks 
along with ‘is’, and ‘is’ makes an affirmation always and in 
every case, whatever the terms to which it is added, in 
predication, e.g. ‘it is not-good’ or ‘it is not-white’ or in a word ‘it 
is not-this’. But this also will be proved in the sequel. In 
conversion these premisses will behave like the other 
affirmative propositions. 

After these distinctions we now state by what means, when, 
and how every syllogism is produced; subsequently we must 
speak of demonstration. Syllogism should be discussed before 
demonstration because syllogism is the general: the 
demonstration is a sort of syllogism, but not every syllogism is a 
demonstration. 

Whenever three terms are so related to one another that the 
last is contained in the middle as in a whole, and the middle is 
either contained in, or excluded from, the first as in or from a 
whole, the extremes must be related by a perfect syllogism. I 
call that term middle which is itself contained in another and 
contains another in itself: in position also this comes in the 
middle. By extremes I mean both that term which is itself 


contained in another and that in which another is contained. If 
A is predicated of all B, and B of all C, A must be predicated of 
all C: we have already explained what we mean by ‘predicated 
of all’. Similarly also, if A is predicated of no B, and B of all C, it 
is necessary that no C will be A. 

But if the first term belongs to all the middle, but the middle to 
none of the last term, there will be no syllogism in respect of 
the extremes; for nothing necessary follows from the terms 
being so related; for it is possible that the first should belong 
either to all or to none of the last, so that neither a particular 
nor a universal conclusion is necessary. But if there is no 
necessary consequence, there cannot be a syllogism by means 
of these premisses. As an example of a universal affirmative 
relation between the extremes we may take the terms animal, 
man, horse; of a universal negative relation, the terms animal, 
man, stone. Nor again can syllogism be formed when neither 
the first term belongs to any of the middle, nor the middle to 
any of the last. As an example of a positive relation between the 
extremes take the terms science, line, medicine: of a negative 
relation science, line, unit. 

If then the terms are universally related, it is clear in this figure 
when a syllogism will be possible and when not, and that if a 
syllogism is possible the terms must be related as described, 
and if they are so related there will be a syllogism. 

But if one term is related universally, the other in part only, to 
its subject, there must be a perfect syllogism whenever 
universality is posited with reference to the major term either 
affirmatively or negatively, and particularity with reference to 
the minor term affirmatively: but whenever the universality is 
posited in relation to the minor term, or the terms are related in 
any other way, a syllogism is impossible. I call that term the 
major in which the middle is contained and that term the 


minor which comes under the middle. Let all B be A and some C 
be B. Then if ‘predicated of all’ means what was said above, it is 
necessary that some C is A. And if no B is A but some C is B, it is 
necessary that some C is not A. The meaning of ‘predicated of 
none’ has also been defined. So there will be a perfect syllogism. 
This holds good also if the premiss BC should be indefinite, 
provided that it is affirmative: for we shall have the same 
syllogism whether the premiss is indefinite or particular. 

But if the universality is posited with respect to the minor term 
either affirmatively or negatively, a syllogism will not be 
possible, whether the major premiss is positive or negative, 
indefinite or particular: e.g. if some B is or is not A, and all C is 

B. As an example of a positive relation between the extremes 
take the terms good, state, wisdom: of a negative relation, good, 
state, ignorance. Again if no C is B, but some B is or is not A or 
not every B is A, there cannot be a syllogism. Take the terms 
white, horse, swan: white, horse, raven. The same terms may be 
taken also if the premiss BA is indefinite. 
Nor when the major premiss is universal, whether affirmative 
or negative, and the minor premiss is negative and particular, 
can there be a syllogism, whether the minor premiss be 
indefinite or particular: e.g. if all B is A and some C is not B, or if 
not all C is B. For the major term may be predicable both of all 
and of none of the minor, to some of which the middle term 
cannot be attributed. Suppose the terms are animal, man, 
white: next take some of the white things of which man is not 
predicated – swan and snow: animal is predicated of all of the 
one, but of none of the other. Consequently there cannot be a 
syllogism. Again let no B be A, but let some C not be B. Take the 
terms inanimate, man, white: then take some white things of 
which man is not predicated – swan and snow: the term 
inanimate is predicated of all of the one, of none of the other. 


Further since it is indefinite to say some C is not B, and it is true 
that some C is not B, whether no C is B, or not all C is B, and 
since if terms are assumed such that no C is B, no syllogism 
follows (this has already been stated) it is clear that this 
arrangement of terms will not afford a syllogism: otherwise one 
would have been possible with a universal negative minor 
premiss. A similar proof may also be given if the universal 
premiss is negative. 

Nor can there in any way be a syllogism if both the relations of 
subject and predicate are particular, either positively or 
negatively, or the one negative and the other affirmative, or one 
indefinite and the other definite, or both indefinite. Terms 
common to all the above are animal, white, horse: animal, 
white, stone. 

It is clear then from what has been said that if there is a 
syllogism in this figure with a particular conclusion, the terms 
must be related as we have stated: if they are related otherwise, 
no syllogism is possible anyhow. It is evident also that all the 
syllogisms in this figure are perfect (for they are all completed 
by means of the premisses originally taken) and that all 
conclusions are proved by this figure, viz. universal and 
particular, affirmative and negative. Such a figure I call the first. 

Whenever the same thing belongs to all of one subject, and to 
none of another, or to all of each subject or to none of either, I 
call such a figure the second; by middle term in it I mean that 
which is predicated of both subjects, by extremes the terms of 
which this is said, by major extreme that which lies near the 
middle, by minor that which is further away from the middle. 


The middle term stands outside the extremes, and is first in 
position. A syllogism cannot be perfect anyhow in this figure, 
but it may be valid whether the terms are related universally or 
not. 

If then the terms are related universally a syllogism will be 
possible, whenever the middle belongs to all of one subject and 
to none of another (it does not matter which has the negative 
relation), but in no other way. Let M be predicated of no N, but of 
all O. Since, then, the negative relation is convertible, N will 
belong to no M: but M was assumed to belong to all O: 
consequently N will belong to no O. This has already been 
proved. Again if M belongs to all N, but to no O, then N will 
belong to no O. For if M belongs to no O, O belongs to no M: but 
M (as was said) belongs to all N: O then will belong to no N: for 
the first figure has again been formed. But since the negative 
relation is convertible, N will belong to no O. Thus it will be the 
same syllogism that proves both conclusions. 

It is possible to prove these results also by reductio ad 
impossibile. 

It is clear then that a syllogism is formed when the terms are so 
related, but not a perfect syllogism; for necessity is not perfectly 
established merely from the original premisses; others also are 
needed. 

But if M is predicated of every N and O, there cannot be a 
syllogism. Terms to illustrate a positive relation between the 
extremes are substance, animal, man; a negative relation, 
substance, animal, number – substance being the middle term. 

Nor is a syllogism possible when M is predicated neither of any 
N nor of any O. Terms to illustrate a positive relation are line, 
animal, man: a negative relation, line, animal, stone. 


It is clear then that if a syllogism is formed when the terms are 
universally related, the terms must be related as we stated at 
the outset: for if they are otherwise related no necessary 
consequence follows. 

If the middle term is related universally to one of the extremes, 
a particular negative syllogism must result whenever the 
middle term is related universally to the major whether 
positively or negatively, and particularly to the minor and in a 
manner opposite to that of the universal statement: by ‘an 
opposite manner’ I mean, if the universal statement is negative, 
the particular is affirmative: if the universal is affirmative, the 
particular is negative. For if M belongs to no N, but to some O, it 
is necessary that N does not belong to some O. For since the 
negative statement is convertible, N will belong to no M: but M 
was admitted to belong to some O: therefore N will not belong 
to some O: for the result is reached by means of the first figure. 
Again if M belongs to all N, but not to some O, it is necessary 
that N does not belong to some O: for if N belongs to all O, and 
M is predicated also of all N, M must belong to all O: but we 
assumed that M does not belong to some O. And if M belongs to 
all N but not to all O, we shall conclude that N does not belong 
to all O: the proof is the same as the above. But if M is 
predicated of all O, but not of all N, there will be no syllogism. 
Take the terms animal, substance, raven; animal, white, raven. 
Nor will there be a conclusion when M is predicated of no O, but 
of some N. Terms to illustrate a positive relation between the 
extremes are animal, substance, unit: a negative relation, 
animal, substance, science. 

If then the universal statement is opposed to the particular, we 
have stated when a syllogism will be possible and when not: 
but if the premisses are similar in form, I mean both negative or 
both affirmative, a syllogism will not be possible anyhow. First 
let them be negative, and let the major premiss be universal, e.g. 


let M belong to no N, and not to some O. It is possible then for N 
to belong either to all O or to no O. Terms to illustrate the 
negative relation are black, snow, animal. But it is not possible 
to find terms of which the extremes are related positively and 
universally, if M belongs to some O, and does not belong to 
some O. For if N belonged to all O, but M to no N, then M would 
belong to no O: but we assumed that it belongs to some O. In 
this way then it is not admissible to take terms: our point must 
be proved from the indefinite nature of the particular 
statement. For since it is true that M does not belong to some O, 
even if it belongs to no O, and since if it belongs to no O a 
syllogism is (as we have seen) not possible, clearly it will not be 
possible now either. 

Again let the premisses be affirmative, and let the major 
premiss as before be universal, e.g. let M belong to all N and to 
some O. It is possible then for N to belong to all O or to no O. 
Terms to illustrate the negative relation are white, swan, stone. 
But it is not possible to take terms to illustrate the universal 
affirmative relation, for the reason already stated: the point 
must be proved from the indefinite nature of the particular 
statement. But if the minor premiss is universal, and M belongs 
to no O, and not to some N, it is possible for N to belong either 
to all O or to no O. Terms for the positive relation are white, 
animal, raven: for the negative relation, white, stone, raven. If 
the premisses are affirmative, terms for the negative relation 
are white, animal, snow; for the positive relation, white, animal, 
swan. Evidently then, whenever the premisses are similar in 
form, and one is universal, the other particular, a syllogism can, 
not be formed anyhow. Nor is one possible if the middle term 
belongs to some of each of the extremes, or does not belong to 
some of either, or belongs to some of the one, not to some of the 
other, or belongs to neither universally, or is related to them 
indefinitely. Common terms for all the above are white, animal, 
man: white, animal, inanimate. It is clear then from what has 


been said that if the terms are related to one another in the way 
stated, a syllogism results of necessity; and if there is a 
syllogism, the terms must be so related. But it is evident also 
that all the syllogisms in this figure are imperfect: for all are 
made perfect by certain supplementary statements, which 
either are contained in the terms of necessity or are assumed as 
hypotheses, i.e. when we prove per impossibile. And it is evident 
that an affirmative conclusion is not attained by means of this 
figure, but all are negative, whether universal or particular. 

But if one term belongs to all, and another to none, of a third, or 
if both belong to all, or to none, of it, I call such a figure the 
third; by middle term in it I mean that of which both the 
predicates are predicated, by extremes I mean the predicates, by 
the major extreme that which is further from the middle, by the 
minor that which is nearer to it. The middle term stands outside 
the extremes, and is last in position. A syllogism cannot be 
perfect in this figure either, but it may be valid whether the 
terms are related universally or not to the middle term. 

If they are universal, whenever both P and R belong to S, it 
follows that P will necessarily belong to some R. For, since the 
affirmative statement is convertible, S will belong to some R: 
consequently since P belongs to all S, and S to some R, P must 
belong to some R: for a syllogism in the first figure is produced. 
It is possible to demonstrate this also per impossibile and by 
exposition. For if both P and R belong to all S, should one of the 
Ss, e.g. N, be taken, both P and R will belong to this, and thus P 
will belong to some R. 


If R belongs to all S, and P to no S, there will be a syllogism to 
prove that P will necessarily not belong to some R. This may be 
demonstrated in the same way as before by converting the 
premiss RS. It might be proved also per impossibile, as in the 
former cases. But if R belongs to no S, P to all S, there will be no 
syllogism. Terms for the positive relation are animal, horse, 
man: for the negative relation animal, inanimate, man. 

Nor can there be a syllogism when both terms are asserted of 
no S. Terms for the positive relation are animal, horse, 
inanimate; for the negative relation man, horse, inanimate – 
inanimate being the middle term. 

It is clear then in this figure also when a syllogism will be 
possible and when not, if the terms are related universally. For 
whenever both the terms are affirmative, there will be a 
syllogism to prove that one extreme belongs to some of the 
other; but when they are negative, no syllogism will be possible. 
But when one is negative, the other affirmative, if the major is 
negative, the minor affirmative, there will be a syllogism to 
prove that the one extreme does not belong to some of the 
other: but if the relation is reversed, no syllogism will be 
possible. If one term is related universally to the middle, the 
other in part only, when both are affirmative there must be a 
syllogism, no matter which of the premisses is universal. For if 
R belongs to all S, P to some S, P must belong to some R. For 
since the affirmative statement is convertible S will belong to 
some P: consequently since R belongs to all S, and S to some P, R 
must also belong to some P: therefore P must belong to some R. 

Again if R belongs to some S, and P to all S, P must belong to 
some R. This may be demonstrated in the same way as the 
preceding. And it is possible to demonstrate it also per 
impossibile and by exposition, as in the former cases. But if one 
term is affirmative, the other negative, and if the affirmative is 


universal, a syllogism will be possible whenever the minor term 
is affirmative. For if R belongs to all S, but P does not belong to 
some S, it is necessary that P does not belong to some R. For if P 
belongs to all R, and R belongs to all S, then P will belong to all 

S: but we assumed that it did not. Proof is possible also without 
reduction ad impossibile, if one of the Ss be taken to which P 
does not belong. 
But whenever the major is affirmative, no syllogism will be 
possible, e.g. if P belongs to all S and R does not belong to some 

S. Terms for the universal affirmative relation are animate, man, 
animal. For the universal negative relation it is not possible to 
get terms, if R belongs to some S, and does not belong to some 
S. For if P belongs to all S, and R to some S, then P will belong to 
some R: but we assumed that it belongs to no R. We must put 
the matter as before.’ Since the expression ‘it does not belong to 
some’ is indefinite, it may be used truly of that also which 
belongs to none. But if R belongs to no S, no syllogism is 
possible, as has been shown. Clearly then no syllogism will be 
possible here. 
But if the negative term is universal, whenever the major is 
negative and the minor affirmative there will be a syllogism. For 
if P belongs to no S, and R belongs to some S, P will not belong 
to some R: for we shall have the first figure again, if the premiss 
RS is converted. 

But when the minor is negative, there will be no syllogism. 
Terms for the positive relation are animal, man, wild: for the 
negative relation, animal, science, wild – the middle in both 
being the term wild. 

Nor is a syllogism possible when both are stated in the negative, 
but one is universal, the other particular. When the minor is 
related universally to the middle, take the terms animal, 
science, wild; animal, man, wild. When the major is related 


universally to the middle, take as terms for a negative relation 
raven, snow, white. For a positive relation terms cannot be 
found, if R belongs to some S, and does not belong to some S. 
For if P belongs to all R, and R to some S, then P belongs to some 

S: but we assumed that it belongs to no S. Our point, then, must 
be proved from the indefinite nature of the particular 
statement. 
Nor is a syllogism possible anyhow, if each of the extremes 
belongs to some of the middle or does not belong, or one 
belongs and the other does not to some of the middle, or one 
belongs to some of the middle, the other not to all, or if the 
premisses are indefinite. Common terms for all are animal, 
man, white: animal, inanimate, white. 

It is clear then in this figure also when a syllogism will be 
possible, and when not; and that if the terms are as stated, a 
syllogism results of necessity, and if there is a syllogism, the 
terms must be so related. It is clear also that all the syllogisms 
in this figure are imperfect (for all are made perfect by certain 
supplementary assumptions), and that it will not be possible to 
reach a universal conclusion by means of this figure, whether 
negative or affirmative. 

It is evident also that in all the figures, whenever a proper 
syllogism does not result, if both the terms are affirmative or 
negative nothing necessary follows at all, but if one is 
affirmative, the other negative, and if the negative is stated 
universally, a syllogism always results relating the minor to the 
major term, e.g. if A belongs to all or some B, and B belongs to 
no C: for if the premisses are converted it is necessary that C 


does not belong to some A. Similarly also in the other figures: a 
syllogism always results by means of conversion. It is evident 
also that the substitution of an indefinite for a particular 
affirmative will effect the same syllogism in all the figures. 

It is clear too that all the imperfect syllogisms are made perfect 
by means of the first figure. For all are brought to a conclusion 
either ostensively or per impossibile. In both ways the first 
figure is formed: if they are made perfect ostensively, because 
(as we saw) all are brought to a conclusion by means of 
conversion, and conversion produces the first figure: if they are 
proved per impossibile, because on the assumption of the false 
statement the syllogism comes about by means of the first 
figure, e.g. in the last figure, if A and B belong to all C, it follows 
that A belongs to some B: for if A belonged to no B, and B 
belongs to all C, A would belong to no C: but (as we stated) it 
belongs to all C. Similarly also with the rest. 

It is possible also to reduce all syllogisms to the universal 
syllogisms in the first figure. Those in the second figure are 
clearly made perfect by these, though not all in the same way; 
the universal syllogisms are made perfect by converting the 
negative premiss, each of the particular syllogisms by reductio 
ad impossibile. In the first figure particular syllogisms are 
indeed made perfect by themselves, but it is possible also to 
prove them by means of the second figure, reducing them ad 
impossibile, e.g. if A belongs to all B, and B to some C, it follows 
that A belongs to some C. For if it belonged to no C, and belongs 
to all B, then B will belong to no C: this we know by means of 
the second figure. Similarly also demonstration will be possible 
in the case of the negative. For if A belongs to no B, and B 
belongs to some C, A will not belong to some C: for if it belonged 
to all C, and belongs to no B, then B will belong to no C: and this 
(as we saw) is the middle figure. Consequently, since all 
syllogisms in the middle figure can be reduced to universal 


syllogisms in the first figure, and since particular syllogisms in 
the first figure can be reduced to syllogisms in the middle 
figure, it is clear that particular syllogisms can be reduced to 
universal syllogisms in the first figure. Syllogisms in the third 
figure, if the terms are universal, are directly made perfect by 
means of those syllogisms; but, when one of the premisses is 
particular, by means of the particular syllogisms in the first 
figure: and these (we have seen) may be reduced to the 
universal syllogisms in the first figure: consequently also the 
particular syllogisms in the third figure may be so reduced. It is 
clear then that all syllogisms may be reduced to the universal 
syllogisms in the first figure. 

We have stated then how syllogisms which prove that 
something belongs or does not belong to something else are 
constituted, both how syllogisms of the same figure are 
constituted in themselves, and how syllogisms of different 
figures are related to one another. 

Since there is a difference according as something belongs, 
necessarily belongs, or may belong to something else (for many 
things belong indeed, but not necessarily, others neither 
necessarily nor indeed at all, but it is possible for them to 
belong), it is clear that there will be different syllogisms to prove 
each of these relations, and syllogisms with differently related 
terms, one syllogism concluding from what is necessary, 
another from what is, a third from what is possible. 

There is hardly any difference between syllogisms from 
necessary premisses and syllogisms from premisses which 
merely assert. When the terms are put in the same way, then, 


whether something belongs or necessarily belongs (or does not 
belong) to something else, a syllogism will or will not result 
alike in both cases, the only difference being the addition of the 
expression ‘necessarily’ to the terms. For the negative statement 
is convertible alike in both cases, and we should give the same 
account of the expressions ‘to be contained in something as in a 
whole’ and ‘to be predicated of all of something’. With the 
exceptions to be made below, the conclusion will be proved to 
be necessary by means of conversion, in the same manner as in 
the case of simple predication. But in the middle figure when 
the universal statement is affirmative, and the particular 
negative, and again in the third figure when the universal is 
affirmative and the particular negative, the demonstration will 
not take the same form, but it is necessary by the ‘exposition’ of 
a part of the subject of the particular negative proposition, to 
which the predicate does not belong, to make the syllogism in 
reference to this: with terms so chosen the conclusion will 
necessarily follow. But if the relation is necessary in respect of 
the part taken, it must hold of some of that term in which this 
part is included: for the part taken is just some of that. And 
each of the resulting syllogisms is in the appropriate figure. 

It happens sometimes also that when one premiss is necessary 
the conclusion is necessary, not however when either premiss is 
necessary, but only when the major is, e.g. if A is taken as 
necessarily belonging or not belonging to B, but B is taken as 
simply belonging to C: for if the premisses are taken in this way, 
A will necessarily belong or not belong to C. For since 
necessarily belongs, or does not belong, to every B, and since C 
is one of the Bs, it is clear that for C also the positive or the 


negative relation to A will hold necessarily. But if the major 
premiss is not necessary, but the minor is necessary, the 
conclusion will not be necessary. For if it were, it would result 
both through the first figure and through the third that A 
belongs necessarily to some B. But this is false; for B may be 
such that it is possible that A should belong to none of it. 
Further, an example also makes it clear that the conclusion not 
be necessary, e.g. if A were movement, B animal, C man: man is 
an animal necessarily, but an animal does not move necessarily, 
nor does man. Similarly also if the major premiss is negative; 
for the proof is the same. 

In particular syllogisms, if the universal premiss is necessary, 
then the conclusion will be necessary; but if the particular, the 
conclusion will not be necessary, whether the universal premiss 
is negative or affirmative. First let the universal be necessary, 
and let A belong to all B necessarily, but let B simply belong to 
some C: it is necessary then that A belongs to some C 
necessarily: for C falls under B, and A was assumed to belong 
necessarily to all B. Similarly also if the syllogism should be 
negative: for the proof will be the same. But if the particular 
premiss is necessary, the conclusion will not be necessary: for 
from the denial of such a conclusion nothing impossible results, 
just as it does not in the universal syllogisms. The same is true 
of negative syllogisms. Try the terms movement, animal, white. 

In the second figure, if the negative premiss is necessary, then 
the conclusion will be necessary, but if the affirmative, not 
necessary. First let the negative be necessary; let A be possible 
of no B, and simply belong to C. Since then the negative 


statement is convertible, B is possible of no A. But A belongs to 
all C; consequently B is possible of no C. For C falls under A. The 
same result would be obtained if the minor premiss were 
negative: for if A is possible be of no C, C is possible of no A: but 
A belongs to all B, consequently C is possible of none of the Bs: 
for again we have obtained the first figure. Neither then is B 
possible of C: for conversion is possible without modifying the 
relation. 

But if the affirmative premiss is necessary, the conclusion will 
not be necessary. Let A belong to all B necessarily, but to no C 
simply. If then the negative premiss is converted, the first figure 
results. But it has been proved in the case of the first figure that 
if the negative major premiss is not necessary the conclusion 
will not be necessary either. Therefore the same result will 
obtain here. Further, if the conclusion is necessary, it follows 
that C necessarily does not belong to some A. For if B 
necessarily belongs to no C, C will necessarily belong to no B. 
But B at any rate must belong to some A, if it is true (as was 
assumed) that A necessarily belongs to all B. Consequently it is 
necessary that C does not belong to some A. But nothing 
prevents such an A being taken that it is possible for C to belong 
to all of it. Further one might show by an exposition of terms 
that the conclusion is not necessary without qualification, 
though it is a necessary conclusion from the premisses. For 
example let A be animal, B man, C white, and let the premisses 
be assumed to correspond to what we had before: it is possible 
that animal should belong to nothing white. Man then will not 
belong to anything white, but not necessarily: for it is possible 
for man to be born white, not however so long as animal 
belongs to nothing white. Consequently under these conditions 
the conclusion will be necessary, but it is not necessary without 
qualification. 


Similar results will obtain also in particular syllogisms. For 
whenever the negative premiss is both universal and necessary, 
then the conclusion will be necessary: but whenever the 
affirmative premiss is universal, the negative particular, the 
conclusion will not be necessary. First then let the negative 
premiss be both universal and necessary: let it be possible for 
no B that A should belong to it, and let A simply belong to some 

C. Since the negative statement is convertible, it will be possible 
for no A that B should belong to it: but A belongs to some C; 
consequently B necessarily does not belong to some of the Cs. 
Again let the affirmative premiss be both universal and 
necessary, and let the major premiss be affirmative. If then A 
necessarily belongs to all B, but does not belong to some C, it is 
clear that B will not belong to some C, but not necessarily. For 
the same terms can be used to demonstrate the point, which 
were used in the universal syllogisms. Nor again, if the negative 
statement is necessary but particular, will the conclusion be 
necessary. The point can be demonstrated by means of the 
same terms. 
In the last figure when the terms are related universally to the 
middle, and both premisses are affirmative, if one of the two is 
necessary, then the conclusion will be necessary. But if one is 
negative, the other affirmative, whenever the negative is 
necessary the conclusion also will be necessary, but whenever 
the affirmative is necessary the conclusion will not be 
necessary. First let both the premisses be affirmative, and let A 
and B belong to all C, and let AC be necessary. Since then B 
belongs to all C, C also will belong to some B, because the 
universal is convertible into the particular: consequently if A 


belongs necessarily to all C, and C belongs to some B, it is 
necessary that A should belong to some B also. For B is under C. 
The first figure then is formed. A similar proof will be given also 
if BC is necessary. For C is convertible with some A: 
consequently if B belongs necessarily to all C, it will belong 
necessarily also to some A. 

Again let AC be negative, BC affirmative, and let the negative 
premiss be necessary. Since then C is convertible with some B, 
but A necessarily belongs to no C, A will necessarily not belong 
to some B either: for B is under C. But if the affirmative is 
necessary, the conclusion will not be necessary. For suppose BC 
is affirmative and necessary, while AC is negative and not 
necessary. Since then the affirmative is convertible, C also will 
belong to some B necessarily: consequently if A belongs to none 
of the Cs, while C belongs to some of the Bs, A will not belong to 
some of the Bs – but not of necessity; for it has been proved, in 
the case of the first figure, that if the negative premiss is not 
necessary, neither will the conclusion be necessary. Further, the 
point may be made clear by considering the terms. Let the term 
A be ‘good’, let that which B signifies be ‘animal’, let the term C 
be ‘horse’. It is possible then that the term good should belong 
to no horse, and it is necessary that the term animal should 
belong to every horse: but it is not necessary that some animal 
should not be good, since it is possible for every animal to be 
good. Or if that is not possible, take as the term ‘awake’ or 
‘asleep’: for every animal can accept these. 

If, then, the premisses are universal, we have stated when the 
conclusion will be necessary. But if one premiss is universal, the 
other particular, and if both are affirmative, whenever the 
universal is necessary the conclusion also must be necessary. 
The demonstration is the same as before; for the particular 
affirmative also is convertible. If then it is necessary that B 
should belong to all C, and A falls under C, it is necessary that B 


should belong to some A. But if B must belong to some A, then A 
must belong to some B: for conversion is possible. Similarly also 
if AC should be necessary and universal: for B falls under C. But 
if the particular premiss is necessary, the conclusion will not be 
necessary. Let the premiss BC be both particular and necessary, 
and let A belong to all C, not however necessarily. If the 
proposition BC is converted the first figure is formed, and the 
universal premiss is not necessary, but the particular is 
necessary. But when the premisses were thus, the conclusion 
(as we proved was not necessary: consequently it is not here 
either. Further, the point is clear if we look at the terms. Let A be 
waking, B biped, and C animal. It is necessary that B should 
belong to some C, but it is possible for A to belong to C, and that 
A should belong to B is not necessary. For there is no necessity 
that some biped should be asleep or awake. Similarly and by 
means of the same terms proof can be made, should the 
proposition AC be both particular and necessary. 

But if one premiss is affirmative, the other negative, whenever 
the universal is both negative and necessary the conclusion also 
will be necessary. For if it is not possible that A should belong to 
any C, but B belongs to some C, it is necessary that A should not 
belong to some B. But whenever the affirmative proposition is 
necessary, whether universal or particular, or the negative is 
particular, the conclusion will not be necessary. The proof of 
this by reduction will be the same as before; but if terms are 
wanted, when the universal affirmative is necessary, take the 
terms ‘waking’ – ‘animal’ – ‘man’, ‘man’ being middle, and when 
the affirmative is particular and necessary, take the terms 
‘waking’ – ‘animal’ – ‘white’: for it is necessary that animal 
should belong to some white thing, but it is possible that 
waking should belong to none, and it is not necessary that 
waking should not belong to some animal. But when the 
negative proposition being particular is necessary, take the 
terms ‘biped’, ‘moving’, ‘animal’, ‘animal’ being middle. 


It is clear then that a simple conclusion is not reached unless 
both premisses are simple assertions, but a necessary 
conclusion is possible although one only of the premisses is 
necessary. But in both cases, whether the syllogisms are 
affirmative or negative, it is necessary that one premiss should 
be similar to the conclusion. I mean by ‘similar’, if the 
conclusion is a simple assertion, the premiss must be simple; if 
the conclusion is necessary, the premiss must be necessary. 
Consequently this also is clear, that the conclusion will be 
neither necessary nor simple unless a necessary or simple 
premiss is assumed. 

Perhaps enough has been said about the proof of necessity, how 
it comes about and how it differs from the proof of a simple 
statement. We proceed to discuss that which is possible, when 
and how and by what means it can be proved. I use the terms 
‘to be possible’ and ‘the possible’ of that which is not necessary 
but, being assumed, results in nothing impossible. We say 
indeed ambiguously of the necessary that it is possible. But that 
my definition of the possible is correct is clear from the phrases 
by which we deny or on the contrary affirm possibility. For the 
expressions ‘it is not possible to belong’, ‘it is impossible to 
belong’, and ‘it is necessary not to belong’ are either identical or 
follow from one another; consequently their opposites also, ‘it is 
possible to belong’, ‘it is not impossible to belong’, and ‘it is not 


necessary not to belong’, will either be identical or follow from 
one another. For of everything the affirmation or the denial 
holds good. That which is possible then will be not necessary 
and that which is not necessary will be possible. It results that 
all premisses in the mode of possibility are convertible into one 
another. I mean not that the affirmative are convertible into the 
negative, but that those which are affirmative in form admit of 
conversion by opposition, e.g. ‘it is possible to belong’ may be 
converted into ‘it is possible not to belong’, and ‘it is possible for 
A to belong to all B’ into ‘it is possible for A to belong to no B’ or 
‘not to all B’, and ‘it is possible for A to belong to some B’ into ‘it 
is possible for A not to belong to some B’. And similarly the 
other propositions in this mode can be converted. For since that 
which is possible is not necessary, and that which is not 
necessary may possibly not belong, it is clear that if it is 
possible that A should belong to B, it is possible also that it 
should not belong to B: and if it is possible that it should belong 
to all, it is also possible that it should not belong to all. The 
same holds good in the case of particular affirmations: for the 
proof is identical. And such premisses are affirmative and not 
negative; for ‘to be possible’ is in the same rank as ‘to be’, as 
was said above. 

Having made these distinctions we next point out that the 
expression ‘to be possible’ is used in two ways. In one it means 
to happen generally and fall short of necessity, e.g. man’s 
turning grey or growing or decaying, or generally what naturally 
belongs to a thing (for this has not its necessity unbroken, since 
man’s existence is not continuous for ever, although if a man 
does exist, it comes about either necessarily or generally). In 
another sense the expression means the indefinite, which can 
be both thus and not thus, e.g. an animal’s walking or an 
earthquake’s taking place while it is walking, or generally what 
happens by chance: for none of these inclines by nature in the 
one way more than in the opposite. 


That which is possible in each of its two senses is convertible 
into its opposite, not however in the same way: but what is 
natural is convertible because it does not necessarily belong (for 
in this sense it is possible that a man should not grow grey) and 
what is indefinite is convertible because it inclines this way no 
more than that. Science and demonstrative syllogism are not 
concerned with things which are indefinite, because the middle 
term is uncertain; but they are concerned with things that are 
natural, and as a rule arguments and inquiries are made about 
things which are possible in this sense. Syllogisms indeed can 
be made about the former, but it is unusual at any rate to 
inquire about them. 

These matters will be treated more definitely in the sequel; our 
business at present is to state the moods and nature of the 
syllogism made from possible premisses. The expression ‘it is 
possible for this to belong to that’ may be understood in two 
senses: ‘that’ may mean either that to which ‘that’ belongs or 
that to which it may belong; for the expression ‘A is possible of 
the subject of B’ means that it is possible either of that of which 
B is stated or of that of which B may possibly be stated. It makes 
no difference whether we say, A is possible of the subject of B, or 
all B admits of A. It is clear then that the expression ‘A may 
possibly belong to all B’ might be used in two senses. First then 
we must state the nature and characteristics of the syllogism 
which arises if B is possible of the subject of C, and A is possible 
of the subject of B. For thus both premisses are assumed in the 
mode of possibility; but whenever A is possible of that of which 
B is true, one premiss is a simple assertion, the other a 
problematic. Consequently we must start from premisses which 
are similar in form, as in the other cases. 


Whenever A may possibly belong to all B, and B to all C, there 
will be a perfect syllogism to prove that A may possibly belong 
to all C. This is clear from the definition: for it was in this way 
that we explained ‘to be possible for one term to belong to all of 
another’. Similarly if it is possible for A to belong no B, and for B 
to belong to all C, then it is possible for A to belong to no C. For 
the statement that it is possible for A not to belong to that of 
which B may be true means (as we saw) that none of those 
things which can possibly fall under the term B is left out of 
account. But whenever A may belong to all B, and B may belong 
to no C, then indeed no syllogism results from the premisses 
assumed, but if the premiss BC is converted after the manner of 
problematic propositions, the same syllogism results as before. 
For since it is possible that B should belong to no C, it is possible 
also that it should belong to all C. This has been stated above. 
Consequently if B is possible for all C, and A is possible for all B, 
the same syllogism again results. Similarly if in both the 
premisses the negative is joined with ‘it is possible’: e.g. if A 
may belong to none of the Bs, and B to none of the Cs. No 
syllogism results from the assumed premisses, but if they are 
converted we shall have the same syllogism as before. It is clear 
then that if the minor premiss is negative, or if both premisses 
are negative, either no syllogism results, or if one it is not 
perfect. For the necessity results from the conversion. 

But if one of the premisses is universal, the other particular, 
when the major premiss is universal there will be a perfect 
syllogism. For if A is possible for all B, and B for some C, then A 
is possible for some C. This is clear from the definition of being 
possible. Again if A may belong to no B, and B may belong to 
some of the Cs, it is necessary that A may possibly not belong to 
some of the Cs. The proof is the same as above. But if the 
particular premiss is negative, and the universal is affirmative, 


the major still being universal and the minor particular, e.g. A is 
possible for all B, B may possibly not belong to some C, then a 
clear syllogism does not result from the assumed premisses, but 
if the particular premiss is converted and it is laid down that B 
possibly may belong to some C, we shall have the same 
conclusion as before, as in the cases given at the beginning. 

But if the major premiss is the minor universal, whether both 
are affirmative, or negative, or different in quality, or if both are 
indefinite or particular, in no way will a syllogism be possible. 
For nothing prevents B from reaching beyond A, so that as 
predicates cover unequal areas. Let C be that by which B 
extends beyond A. To C it is not possible that A should belong – 
either to all or to none or to some or not to some, since 
premisses in the mode of possibility are convertible and it is 
possible for B to belong to more things than A can. Further, this 
is obvious if we take terms; for if the premisses are as assumed, 
the major term is both possible for none of the minor and must 
belong to all of it. Take as terms common to all the cases under 
consideration ‘animal’ – ‘white’ – ‘man’, where the major 
belongs necessarily to the minor; ‘animal’ – ‘white’ – ‘garment’, 
where it is not possible that the major should belong to the 
minor. It is clear then that if the terms are related in this 
manner, no syllogism results. For every syllogism proves that 
something belongs either simply or necessarily or possibly. It is 
clear that there is no proof of the first or of the second. For the 
affirmative is destroyed by the negative, and the negative by the 
affirmative. There remains the proof of possibility. But this is 
impossible. For it has been proved that if the terms are related 
in this manner it is both necessary that the major should 
belong to all the minor and not possible that it should belong to 
any. Consequently there cannot be a syllogism to prove the 
possibility; for the necessary (as we stated) is not possible. 


It is clear that if the terms are universal in possible premisses a 
syllogism always results in the first figure, whether they are 
affirmative or negative, only a perfect syllogism results in the 
first case, an imperfect in the second. But possibility must be 
understood according to the definition laid down, not as 
covering necessity. This is sometimes forgotten. 

If one premiss is a simple proposition, the other a problematic, 
whenever the major premiss indicates possibility all the 
syllogisms will be perfect and establish possibility in the sense 
defined; but whenever the minor premiss indicates possibility 
all the syllogisms will be imperfect, and those which are 
negative will establish not possibility according to the 
definition, but that the major does not necessarily belong to 
any, or to all, of the minor. For if this is so, we say it is possible 
that it should belong to none or not to all. Let A be possible for 
all B, and let B belong to all C. Since C falls under B, and A is 
possible for all B, clearly it is possible for all C also. So a perfect 
syllogism results. Likewise if the premiss AB is negative, and the 
premiss BC is affirmative, the former stating possible, the latter 
simple attribution, a perfect syllogism results proving that A 
possibly belongs to no C. 

It is clear that perfect syllogisms result if the minor premiss 
states simple belonging: but that syllogisms will result if the 
modality of the premisses is reversed, must be proved per 
impossibile. At the same time it will be evident that they are 
imperfect: for the proof proceeds not from the premisses 
assumed. First we must state that if B’s being follows 
necessarily from A’s being, B’s possibility will follow necessarily 


from A’s possibility. Suppose, the terms being so related, that A 
is possible, and B is impossible. If then that which is possible, 
when it is possible for it to be, might happen, and if that which 
is impossible, when it is impossible, could not happen, and if at 
the same time A is possible and B impossible, it would be 
possible for A to happen without B, and if to happen, then to be. 
For that which has happened, when it has happened, is. But we 
must take the impossible and the possible not only in the 
sphere of becoming, but also in the spheres of truth and 
predicability, and the various other spheres in which we speak 
of the possible: for it will be alike in all. Further we must 
understand the statement that B’s being depends on A’s being, 
not as meaning that if some single thing A is, B will be: for 
nothing follows of necessity from the being of some one thing, 
but from two at least, i.e. when the premisses are related in the 
manner stated to be that of the syllogism. For if C is predicated 
of D, and D of F, then C is necessarily predicated of F. And if each 
is possible, the conclusion also is possible. If then, for example, 
one should indicate the premisses by A, and the conclusion by 
B, it would not only result that if A is necessary B is necessary, 
but also that if A is possible, B is possible. 

Since this is proved it is evident that if a false and not 
impossible assumption is made, the consequence of the 
assumption will also be false and not impossible: e.g. if A is 
false, but not impossible, and if B is the consequence of A, B also 
will be false but not impossible. For since it has been proved 
that if B’s being is the consequence of A’s being, then B’s 
possibility will follow from A’s possibility (and A is assumed to 
be possible), consequently B will be possible: for if it were 
impossible, the same thing would at the same time be possible 
and impossible. 

Since we have defined these points, let A belong to all B, and B 
be possible for all C: it is necessary then that should be a 


possible attribute for all C. Suppose that it is not possible, but 
assume that B belongs to all C: this is false but not impossible. If 
then A is not possible for C but B belongs to all C, then A is not 
possible for all B: for a syllogism is formed in the third degree. 
But it was assumed that A is a possible attribute for all B. It is 
necessary then that A is possible for all C. For though the 
assumption we made is false and not impossible, the 
conclusion is impossible. It is possible also in the first figure to 
bring about the impossibility, by assuming that B belongs to C. 
For if B belongs to all C, and A is possible for all B, then A would 
be possible for all C. But the assumption was made that A is not 
possible for all C. 

We must understand ‘that which belongs to all’ with no 
limitation in respect of time, e.g. to the present or to a particular 
period, but simply without qualification. For it is by the help of 
such premisses that we make syllogisms, since if the premiss is 
understood with reference to the present moment, there cannot 
be a syllogism. For nothing perhaps prevents ‘man’ belonging at 
a particular time to everything that is moving, i.e. if nothing else 
were moving: but ‘moving’ is possible for every horse; yet ‘man’ 
is possible for no horse. Further let the major term be ‘animal’, 
the middle ‘moving’, the the minor ‘man’. The premisses then 
will be as before, but the conclusion necessary, not possible. For 
man is necessarily animal. It is clear then that the universal 
must be understood simply, without limitation in respect of 
time. 

Again let the premiss AB be universal and negative, and assume 
that A belongs to no B, but B possibly belongs to all C. These 
propositions being laid down, it is necessary that A possibly 
belongs to no C. Suppose that it cannot belong, and that B 
belongs to C, as above. It is necessary then that A belongs to 
some B: for we have a syllogism in the third figure: but this is 
impossible. Thus it will be possible for A to belong to no C; for if 


at is supposed false, the consequence is an impossible one. This 
syllogism then does not establish that which is possible 
according to the definition, but that which does not necessarily 
belong to any part of the subject (for this is the contradictory of 
the assumption which was made: for it was supposed that A 
necessarily belongs to some C, but the syllogism per impossibile 
establishes the contradictory which is opposed to this). Further, 
it is clear also from an example that the conclusion will not 
establish possibility. Let A be ‘raven’, B ‘intelligent’, and C ‘man’. 
A then belongs to no B: for no intelligent thing is a raven. But B 
is possible for all C: for every man may possibly be intelligent. 
But A necessarily belongs to no C: so the conclusion does not 
establish possibility. But neither is it always necessary. Let A be 
‘moving’, B ‘science’, C ‘man’. A then will belong to no B; but B is 
possible for all C. And the conclusion will not be necessary. For 
it is not necessary that no man should move; rather it is not 
necessary that any man should move. Clearly then the 
conclusion establishes that one term does not necessarily 
belong to any instance of another term. But we must take our 
terms better. 

If the minor premiss is negative and indicates possibility, from 
the actual premisses taken there can be no syllogism, but if the 
problematic premiss is converted, a syllogism will be possible, 
as before. Let A belong to all B, and let B possibly belong to no C. 
If the terms are arranged thus, nothing necessarily follows: but 
if the proposition BC is converted and it is assumed that B is 
possible for all C, a syllogism results as before: for the terms are 
in the same relative positions. Likewise if both the relations are 
negative, if the major premiss states that A does not belong to B, 
and the minor premiss indicates that B may possibly belong to 
no C. Through the premisses actually taken nothing necessary 
results in any way; but if the problematic premiss is converted, 
we shall have a syllogism. Suppose that A belongs to no B, and B 
may possibly belong to no C. Through these comes nothing 


necessary. But if B is assumed to be possible for all C (and this is 
true) and if the premiss AB remains as before, we shall again 
have the same syllogism. But if it be assumed that B does not 
belong to any C, instead of possibly not belonging, there cannot 
be a syllogism anyhow, whether the premiss AB is negative or 
affirmative. As common instances of a necessary and positive 
relation we may take the terms white – animal – snow: of a 
necessary and negative relation, white – animal – pitch. Clearly 
then if the terms are universal, and one of the premisses is 
assertoric, the other problematic, whenever the minor premiss 
is problematic a syllogism always results, only sometimes it 
results from the premisses that are taken, sometimes it requires 
the conversion of one premiss. We have stated when each of 
these happens and the reason why. But if one of the relations is 
universal, the other particular, then whenever the major 
premiss is universal and problematic, whether affirmative or 
negative, and the particular is affirmative and assertoric, there 
will be a perfect syllogism, just as when the terms are universal. 
The demonstration is the same as before. But whenever the 
major premiss is universal, but assertoric, not problematic, and 
the minor is particular and problematic, whether both 
premisses are negative or affirmative, or one is negative, the 
other affirmative, in all cases there will be an imperfect 
syllogism. Only some of them will be proved per impossibile, 
others by the conversion of the problematic premiss, as has 
been shown above. And a syllogism will be possible by means of 
conversion when the major premiss is universal and assertoric, 
whether positive or negative, and the minor particular, negative, 
and problematic, e.g. if A belongs to all B or to no B, and B may 
possibly not belong to some C. For if the premiss BC is 
converted in respect of possibility, a syllogism results. But 
whenever the particular premiss is assertoric and negative, 
there cannot be a syllogism. As instances of the positive relation 
we may take the terms white – animal – snow; of the negative, 


white – animal – pitch. For the demonstration must be made 
through the indefinite nature of the particular premiss. But if 
the minor premiss is universal, and the major particular, 
whether either premiss is negative or affirmative, problematic 
or assertoric, nohow is a syllogism possible. Nor is a syllogism 
possible when the premisses are particular or indefinite, 
whether problematic or assertoric, or the one problematic, the 
other assertoric. The demonstration is the same as above. As 
instances of the necessary and positive relation we may take 
the terms animal – white – man; of the necessary and negative 
relation, animal – white – garment. It is evident then that if the 
major premiss is universal, a syllogism always results, but if the 
minor is universal nothing at all can ever be proved. 

Whenever one premiss is necessary, the other problematic, 
there will be a syllogism when the terms are related as before; 
and a perfect syllogism when the minor premiss is necessary. If 
the premisses are affirmative the conclusion will be 
problematic, not assertoric, whether the premisses are universal 
or not: but if one is affirmative, the other negative, when the 
affirmative is necessary the conclusion will be problematic, not 
negative assertoric; but when the negative is necessary the 
conclusion will be problematic negative, and assertoric negative, 
whether the premisses are universal or not. Possibility in the 
conclusion must be understood in the same manner as before. 
There cannot be an inference to the necessary negative 
proposition: for ‘not necessarily to belong’ is different from 
‘necessarily not to belong’. 


If the premisses are affirmative, clearly the conclusion which 
follows is not necessary. Suppose A necessarily belongs to all B, 
and let B be possible for all C. We shall have an imperfect 
syllogism to prove that A may belong to all C. That it is 
imperfect is clear from the proof: for it will be proved in the 
same manner as above. Again, let A be possible for all B, and let 
B necessarily belong to all C. We shall then have a syllogism to 
prove that A may belong to all C, not that A does belong to all C: 
and it is perfect, not imperfect: for it is completed directly 
through the original premisses. 

But if the premisses are not similar in quality, suppose first that 
the negative premiss is necessary, and let necessarily A not be 
possible for any B, but let B be possible for all C. It is necessary 
then that A belongs to no C. For suppose A to belong to all C or 
to some C. Now we assumed that A is not possible for any B. 
Since then the negative proposition is convertible, B is not 
possible for any A. But A is supposed to belong to all C or to 
some C. Consequently B will not be possible for any C or for all 

C. But it was originally laid down that B is possible for all C. And 
it is clear that the possibility of belonging can be inferred, since 
the fact of not belonging is inferred. Again, let the affirmative 
premiss be necessary, and let A possibly not belong to any B, 
and let B necessarily belong to all C. The syllogism will be 
perfect, but it will establish a problematic negative, not an 
assertoric negative. For the major premiss was problematic, and 
further it is not possible to prove the assertoric conclusion per 
impossibile. For if it were supposed that A belongs to some C, 
and it is laid down that A possibly does not belong to any B, no 
impossible relation between B and C follows from these 
premisses. But if the minor premiss is negative, when it is 
problematic a syllogism is possible by conversion, as above; but 
when it is necessary no syllogism can be formed. Nor again 
when both premisses are negative, and the minor is necessary. 
The same terms as before serve both for the positive relation – 

white-animal-snow, and for the negative relation – whiteanimal-
pitch. 

The same relation will obtain in particular syllogisms. 
Whenever the negative proposition is necessary, the conclusion 
will be negative assertoric: e.g. if it is not possible that A should 
belong to any B, but B may belong to some of the Cs, it is 
necessary that A should not belong to some of the Cs. For if A 
belongs to all C, but cannot belong to any B, neither can B 
belong to any A. So if A belongs to all C, to none of the Cs can B 
belong. But it was laid down that B may belong to some C. But 
when the particular affirmative in the negative syllogism, e.g. 
BC the minor premiss, or the universal proposition in the 
affirmative syllogism, e.g. AB the major premiss, is necessary, 
there will not be an assertoric conclusion. The demonstration is 
the same as before. But if the minor premiss is universal, and 
problematic, whether affirmative or negative, and the major 
premiss is particular and necessary, there cannot be a syllogism. 
Premisses of this kind are possible both where the relation is 
positive and necessary, e.g. animal-white-man, and where it is 
necessary and negative, e.g. animal-white-garment. But when 
the universal is necessary, the particular problematic, if the 
universal is negative we may take the terms animal-whiteraven 
to illustrate the positive relation, or animal-white-pitch to 
illustrate the negative; and if the universal is affirmative we 
may take the terms animal-white-swan to illustrate the positive 
relation, and animal-white-snow to illustrate the negative and 
necessary relation. Nor again is a syllogism possible when the 
premisses are indefinite, or both particular. Terms applicable in 
either case to illustrate the positive relation are animal-whiteman: 
to illustrate the negative, animal-white-inanimate. For the 
relation of animal to some white, and of white to some 
inanimate, is both necessary and positive and necessary and 
negative. Similarly if the relation is problematic: so the terms 
may be used for all cases. 


Clearly then from what has been said a syllogism results or not 
from similar relations of the terms whether we are dealing with 
simple existence or necessity, with this exception, that if the 
negative premiss is assertoric the conclusion is problematic, but 
if the negative premiss is necessary the conclusion is both 
problematic and negative assertoric. [It is clear also that all the 
syllogisms are imperfect and are perfected by means of the 
figures above mentioned.] 

In the second figure whenever both premisses are problematic, 
no syllogism is possible, whether the premisses are affirmative 
or negative, universal or particular. But when one premiss is 
assertoric, the other problematic, if the affirmative is assertoric 
no syllogism is possible, but if the universal negative is 
assertoric a conclusion can always be drawn. Similarly when 
one premiss is necessary, the other problematic. Here also we 
must understand the term ‘possible’ in the conclusion, in the 
same sense as before. 

First we must point out that the negative problematic 
proposition is not convertible, e.g. if A may belong to no B, it 
does not follow that B may belong to no A. For suppose it to 
follow and assume that B may belong to no A. Since then 
problematic affirmations are convertible with negations, 
whether they are contraries or contradictories, and since B may 
belong to no A, it is clear that B may belong to all A. But this is 
false: for if all this can be that, it does not follow that all that 
can be this: consequently the negative proposition is not 
convertible. Further, these propositions are not incompatible, ‘A 
may belong to no B’, ‘B necessarily does not belong to some of 


the As’; e.g. it is possible that no man should be white (for it is 
also possible that every man should be white), but it is not true 
to say that it is possible that no white thing should be a man: 
for many white things are necessarily not men, and the 
necessary (as we saw) other than the possible. 

Moreover it is not possible to prove the convertibility of these 
propositions by a reductio ad absurdum, i.e. by claiming assent 
to the following argument: ‘since it is false that B may belong to 
no A, it is true that it cannot belong to no A, for the one 
statement is the contradictory of the other. But if this is so, it is 
true that B necessarily belongs to some of the As: consequently 
A necessarily belongs to some of the Bs. But this is impossible.’ 
The argument cannot be admitted, for it does not follow that 
some A is necessarily B, if it is not possible that no A should be 

B. For the latter expression is used in two senses, one if A some 
is necessarily B, another if some A is necessarily not B. For it is 
not true to say that that which necessarily does not belong to 
some of the As may possibly not belong to any A, just as it is not 
true to say that what necessarily belongs to some A may 
possibly belong to all A. If any one then should claim that 
because it is not possible for C to belong to all D, it necessarily 
does not belong to some D, he would make a false assumption: 
for it does belong to all D, but because in some cases it belongs 
necessarily, therefore we say that it is not possible for it to 
belong to all. Hence both the propositions ‘A necessarily belongs 
to some B’ and ‘A necessarily does not belong to some B’ are 
opposed to the proposition ‘A belongs to all B’. Similarly also 
they are opposed to the proposition ‘A may belong to no B’. It is 
clear then that in relation to what is possible and not possible, 
in the sense originally defined, we must assume, not that A 
necessarily belongs to some B, but that A necessarily does not 
belong to some B. But if this is assumed, no absurdity results: 
consequently no syllogism. It is clear from what has been said 
that the negative proposition is not convertible. 

This being proved, suppose it possible that A may belong to no B 
and to all C. By means of conversion no syllogism will result: for 
the major premiss, as has been said, is not convertible. Nor can 
a proof be obtained by a reductio ad absurdum: for if it is 
assumed that B can belong to all C, no false consequence 
results: for A may belong both to all C and to no C. In general, if 
there is a syllogism, it is clear that its conclusion will be 
problematic because neither of the premisses is assertoric; and 
this must be either affirmative or negative. But neither is 
possible. Suppose the conclusion is affirmative: it will be proved 
by an example that the predicate cannot belong to the subject. 
Suppose the conclusion is negative: it will be proved that it is 
not problematic but necessary. Let A be white, B man, C horse. It 
is possible then for A to belong to all of the one and to none of 
the other. But it is not possible for B to belong nor not to belong 
to C. That it is not possible for it to belong, is clear. For no horse 
is a man. Neither is it possible for it not to belong. For it is 
necessary that no horse should be a man, but the necessary we 
found to be different from the possible. No syllogism then 
results. A similar proof can be given if the major premiss is 
negative, the minor affirmative, or if both are affirmative or 
negative. The demonstration can be made by means of the same 
terms. And whenever one premiss is universal, the other 
particular, or both are particular or indefinite, or in whatever 
other way the premisses can be altered, the proof will always 
proceed through the same terms. Clearly then, if both the 
premisses are problematic, no syllogism results. 

But if one premiss is assertoric, the other problematic, if the 
affirmative is assertoric and the negative problematic no 



syllogism will be possible, whether the premisses are universal 
or particular. The proof is the same as above, and by means of 
the same terms. But when the affirmative premiss is 
problematic, and the negative assertoric, we shall have a 
syllogism. Suppose A belongs to no B, but can belong to all C. If 
the negative proposition is converted, B will belong to no A. But 
ex hypothesi can belong to all C: so a syllogism is made, proving 
by means of the first figure that B may belong to no C. Similarly 
also if the minor premiss is negative. But if both premisses are 
negative, one being assertoric, the other problematic, nothing 
follows necessarily from these premisses as they stand, but if 
the problematic premiss is converted into its complementary 
affirmative a syllogism is formed to prove that B may belong to 
no C, as before: for we shall again have the first figure. But if 
both premisses are affirmative, no syllogism will be possible. 
This arrangement of terms is possible both when the relation is 
positive, e.g. health, animal, man, and when it is negative, e.g. 
health, horse, man. 

The same will hold good if the syllogisms are particular. 
Whenever the affirmative proposition is assertoric, whether 
universal or particular, no syllogism is possible (this is proved 
similarly and by the same examples as above), but when the 
negative proposition is assertoric, a conclusion can be drawn by 
means of conversion, as before. Again if both the relations are 
negative, and the assertoric proposition is universal, although 
no conclusion follows from the actual premisses, a syllogism 
can be obtained by converting the problematic premiss into its 
complementary affirmative as before. But if the negative 
proposition is assertoric, but particular, no syllogism is possible, 
whether the other premiss is affirmative or negative. Nor can a 
conclusion be drawn when both premisses are indefinite, 
whether affirmative or negative, or particular. The proof is the 
same and by the same terms. 


If one of the premisses is necessary, the other problematic, then 
if the negative is necessary a syllogistic conclusion can be 
drawn, not merely a negative problematic but also a negative 
assertoric conclusion; but if the affirmative premiss is 
necessary, no conclusion is possible. Suppose that A necessarily 
belongs to no B, but may belong to all C. If the negative premiss 
is converted B will belong to no A: but A ex hypothesi is capable 
of belonging to all C: so once more a conclusion is drawn by the 
first figure that B may belong to no C. But at the same time it is 
clear that B will not belong to any C. For assume that it does: 
then if A cannot belong to any B, and B belongs to some of the 
Cs, A cannot belong to some of the Cs: but ex hypothesi it may 
belong to all. A similar proof can be given if the minor premiss 
is negative. Again let the affirmative proposition be necessary, 
and the other problematic; i.e. suppose that A may belong to no 
B, but necessarily belongs to all C. When the terms are arranged 
in this way, no syllogism is possible. For (1) it sometimes turns 
out that B necessarily does not belong to C. Let A be white, B 
man, C swan. White then necessarily belongs to swan, but may 
belong to no man; and man necessarily belongs to no swan; 
Clearly then we cannot draw a problematic conclusion; for that 
which is necessary is admittedly distinct from that which is 
possible. (2) Nor again can we draw a necessary conclusion: for 
that presupposes that both premisses are necessary, or at any 
rate the negative premiss. (3) Further it is possible also, when 
the terms are so arranged, that B should belong to C: for 
nothing prevents C falling under B, A being possible for all B, 
and necessarily belonging to C; e.g. if C stands for ‘awake’, B for 
‘animal’, A for ‘motion’. For motion necessarily belongs to what 


is awake, and is possible for every animal: and everything that is 
awake is animal. Clearly then the conclusion cannot be the 
negative assertion, if the relation must be positive when the 
terms are related as above. Nor can the opposite affirmations be 
established: consequently no syllogism is possible. A similar 
proof is possible if the major premiss is affirmative. 

But if the premisses are similar in quality, when they are 
negative a syllogism can always be formed by converting the 
problematic premiss into its complementary affirmative as 
before. Suppose A necessarily does not belong to B, and possibly 
may not belong to C: if the premisses are converted B belongs to 
no A, and A may possibly belong to all C: thus we have the first 
figure. Similarly if the minor premiss is negative. But if the 
premisses are affirmative there cannot be a syllogism. Clearly 
the conclusion cannot be a negative assertoric or a negative 
necessary proposition because no negative premiss has been 
laid down either in the assertoric or in the necessary mode. Nor 
can the conclusion be a problematic negative proposition. For if 
the terms are so related, there are cases in which B necessarily 
will not belong to C; e.g. suppose that A is white, B swan, C man. 
Nor can the opposite affirmations be established, since we have 
shown a case in which B necessarily does not belong to C. A 
syllogism then is not possible at all. 

Similar relations will obtain in particular syllogisms. For 
whenever the negative proposition is universal and necessary, a 
syllogism will always be possible to prove both a problematic 
and a negative assertoric proposition (the proof proceeds by 
conversion); but when the affirmative proposition is universal 
and necessary, no syllogistic conclusion can be drawn. This can 
be proved in the same way as for universal propositions, and by 
the same terms. Nor is a syllogistic conclusion possible when 
both premisses are affirmative: this also may be proved as 
above. But when both premisses are negative, and the premiss 


that definitely disconnects two terms is universal and 
necessary, though nothing follows necessarily from the 
premisses as they are stated, a conclusion can be drawn as 
above if the problematic premiss is converted into its 
complementary affirmative. But if both are indefinite or 
particular, no syllogism can be formed. The same proof will 
serve, and the same terms. 

It is clear then from what has been said that if the universal and 
negative premiss is necessary, a syllogism is always possible, 
proving not merely a negative problematic, but also a negative 
assertoric proposition; but if the affirmative premiss is 
necessary no conclusion can be drawn. It is clear too that a 
syllogism is possible or not under the same conditions whether 
the mode of the premisses is assertoric or necessary. And it is 
clear that all the syllogisms are imperfect, and are completed by 
means of the figures mentioned. 

In the last figure a syllogism is possible whether both or only 
one of the premisses is problematic. When the premisses are 
problematic the conclusion will be problematic; and also when 
one premiss is problematic, the other assertoric. But when the 
other premiss is necessary, if it is affirmative the conclusion will 
be neither necessary or assertoric; but if it is negative the 
syllogism will result in a negative assertoric proposition, as 
above. In these also we must understand the expression 
‘possible’ in the conclusion in the same way as before. 

First let the premisses be problematic and suppose that both A 
and B may possibly belong to every C. Since then the affirmative 
proposition is convertible into a particular, and B may possibly 


belong to every C, it follows that C may possibly belong to some 

B. So, if A is possible for every C, and C is possible for some of 
the Bs, then A is possible for some of the Bs. For we have got the 
first figure. And A if may possibly belong to no C, but B may 
possibly belong to all C, it follows that A may possibly not 
belong to some B: for we shall have the first figure again by 
conversion. But if both premisses should be negative no 
necessary consequence will follow from them as they are 
stated, but if the premisses are converted into their 
corresponding affirmatives there will be a syllogism as before. 
For if A and B may possibly not belong to C, if ‘may possibly 
belong’ is substituted we shall again have the first figure by 
means of conversion. But if one of the premisses is universal, 
the other particular, a syllogism will be possible, or not, under 
the arrangement of the terms as in the case of assertoric 
propositions. Suppose that A may possibly belong to all C, and B 
to some C. We shall have the first figure again if the particular 
premiss is converted. For if A is possible for all C, and C for 
some of the Bs, then A is possible for some of the Bs. Similarly if 
the proposition BC is universal. Likewise also if the proposition 
AC is negative, and the proposition BC affirmative: for we shall 
again have the first figure by conversion. But if both premisses 
should be negative – the one universal and the other particular 
– although no syllogistic conclusion will follow from the 
premisses as they are put, it will follow if they are converted, as 
above. But when both premisses are indefinite or particular, no 
syllogism can be formed: for A must belong sometimes to all B 
and sometimes to no B. To illustrate the affirmative relation 
take the terms animal-man-white; to illustrate the negative, 
take the terms horse-man-white – white being the middle term. 

If one premiss is pure, the other problematic, the conclusion 
will be problematic, not pure; and a syllogism will be possible 
under the same arrangement of the terms as before. First let the 
premisses be affirmative: suppose that A belongs to all C, and B 
may possibly belong to all C. If the proposition BC is converted, 
we shall have the first figure, and the conclusion that A may 
possibly belong to some of the Bs. For when one of the 
premisses in the first figure is problematic, the conclusion also 
(as we saw) is problematic. Similarly if the proposition BC is 
pure, AC problematic; or if AC is negative, BC affirmative, no 
matter which of the two is pure; in both cases the conclusion 
will be problematic: for the first figure is obtained once more, 
and it has been proved that if one premiss is problematic in that 
figure the conclusion also will be problematic. But if the minor 
premiss BC is negative, or if both premisses are negative, no 
syllogistic conclusion can be drawn from the premisses as they 
stand, but if they are converted a syllogism is obtained as 
before. 

If one of the premisses is universal, the other particular, then 
when both are affirmative, or when the universal is negative, 
the particular affirmative, we shall have the same sort of 
syllogisms: for all are completed by means of the first figure. So 
it is clear that we shall have not a pure but a problematic 
syllogistic conclusion. But if the affirmative premiss is 
universal, the negative particular, the proof will proceed by a 
reductio ad impossibile. Suppose that B belongs to all C, and A 
may possibly not belong to some C: it follows that may possibly 
not belong to some B. For if A necessarily belongs to all B, and B 
(as has been assumed) belongs to all C, A will necessarily belong 
to all C: for this has been proved before. But it was assumed at 
the outset that A may possibly not belong to some C. 


Whenever both premisses are indefinite or particular, no 
syllogism will be possible. The demonstration is the same as 
was given in the case of universal premisses, and proceeds by 
means of the same terms. 

If one of the premisses is necessary, the other problematic, 
when the premisses are affirmative a problematic affirmative 
conclusion can always be drawn; when one proposition is 
affirmative, the other negative, if the affirmative is necessary a 
problematic negative can be inferred; but if the negative 
proposition is necessary both a problematic and a pure negative 
conclusion are possible. But a necessary negative conclusion 
will not be possible, any more than in the other figures. Suppose 
first that the premisses are affirmative, i.e. that A necessarily 
belongs to all C, and B may possibly belong to all C. Since then A 
must belong to all C, and C may belong to some B, it follows that 
A may (not does) belong to some B: for so it resulted in the first 
figure. A similar proof may be given if the proposition BC is 
necessary, and AC is problematic. Again suppose one 
proposition is affirmative, the other negative, the affirmative 
being necessary: i.e. suppose A may possibly belong to no C, but 
B necessarily belongs to all C. We shall have the first figure once 
more: and – since the negative premiss is problematic – it is 
clear that the conclusion will be problematic: for when the 
premisses stand thus in the first figure, the conclusion (as we 
found) is problematic. But if the negative premiss is necessary, 
the conclusion will be not only that A may possibly not belong 
to some B but also that it does not belong to some B. For 
suppose that A necessarily does not belong to C, but B may 
belong to all C. If the affirmative proposition BC is converted, we 


shall have the first figure, and the negative premiss is necessary. 
But when the premisses stood thus, it resulted that A might 
possibly not belong to some C, and that it did not belong to 
some C; consequently here it follows that A does not belong to 
some B. But when the minor premiss is negative, if it is 
problematic we shall have a syllogism by altering the premiss 
into its complementary affirmative, as before; but if it is 
necessary no syllogism can be formed. For A sometimes 
necessarily belongs to all B, and sometimes cannot possibly 
belong to any B. To illustrate the former take the terms sleep-
sleeping horse-man; to illustrate the latter take the terms sleep-
waking horse-man. 

Similar results will obtain if one of the terms is related 
universally to the middle, the other in part. If both premisses 
are affirmative, the conclusion will be problematic, not pure; 
and also when one premiss is negative, the other affirmative, 
the latter being necessary. But when the negative premiss is 
necessary, the conclusion also will be a pure negative 
proposition; for the same kind of proof can be given whether 
the terms are universal or not. For the syllogisms must be made 
perfect by means of the first figure, so that a result which 
follows in the first figure follows also in the third. But when the 
minor premiss is negative and universal, if it is problematic a 
syllogism can be formed by means of conversion; but if it is 
necessary a syllogism is not possible. The proof will follow the 
same course as where the premisses are universal; and the 
same terms may be used. 

It is clear then in this figure also when and how a syllogism can 
be formed, and when the conclusion is problematic, and when 
it is pure. It is evident also that all syllogisms in this figure are 
imperfect, and that they are made perfect by means of the first 
figure. 


It is clear from what has been said that the syllogisms in these 
figures are made perfect by means of universal syllogisms in 
the first figure and are reduced to them. That every syllogism 
without qualification can be so treated, will be clear presently, 
when it has been proved that every syllogism is formed through 
one or other of these figures. 

It is necessary that every demonstration and every syllogism 
should prove either that something belongs or that it does not, 
and this either universally or in part, and further either 
ostensively or hypothetically. One sort of hypothetical proof is 
the reductio ad impossibile. Let us speak first of ostensive 
syllogisms: for after these have been pointed out the truth of 
our contention will be clear with regard to those which are 
proved per impossibile, and in general hypothetically. 

If then one wants to prove syllogistically A of B, either as an 
attribute of it or as not an attribute of it, one must assert 
something of something else. If now A should be asserted of B, 
the proposition originally in question will have been assumed. 
But if A should be asserted of C, but C should not be asserted of 
anything, nor anything of it, nor anything else of A, no syllogism 
will be possible. For nothing necessarily follows from the 
assertion of some one thing concerning some other single thing. 
Thus we must take another premiss as well. If then A be 
asserted of something else, or something else of A, or 
something different of C, nothing prevents a syllogism being 
formed, but it will not be in relation to B through the premisses 
taken. Nor when C belongs to something else, and that to 
something else and so on, no connexion however being made 


with B, will a syllogism be possible concerning A in its relation 
to B. For in general we stated that no syllogism can establish the 
attribution of one thing to another, unless some middle term is 
taken, which is somehow related to each by way of predication. 
For the syllogism in general is made out of premisses, and a 
syllogism referring to this out of premisses with the same 
reference, and a syllogism relating this to that proceeds through 
premisses which relate this to that. But it is impossible to take a 
premiss in reference to B, if we neither affirm nor deny 
anything of it; or again to take a premiss relating A to B, if we 
take nothing common, but affirm or deny peculiar attributes of 
each. So we must take something midway between the two, 
which will connect the predications, if we are to have a 
syllogism relating this to that. If then we must take something 
common in relation to both, and this is possible in three ways 
(either by predicating A of C, and C of B, or C of both, or both of 
C), and these are the figures of which we have spoken, it is clear 
that every syllogism must be made in one or other of these 
figures. The argument is the same if several middle terms 
should be necessary to establish the relation to B; for the figure 
will be the same whether there is one middle term or many. 

It is clear then that the ostensive syllogisms are effected by 
means of the aforesaid figures; these considerations will show 
that reductiones ad also are effected in the same way. For all 
who effect an argument per impossibile infer syllogistically 
what is false, and prove the original conclusion hypothetically 
when something impossible results from the assumption of its 
contradictory; e.g. that the diagonal of the square is 
incommensurate with the side, because odd numbers are equal 
to evens if it is supposed to be commensurate. One infers 
syllogistically that odd numbers come out equal to evens, and 
one proves hypothetically the incommensurability of the 
diagonal, since a falsehood results through contradicting this. 
For this we found to be reasoning per impossibile, viz. proving 


something impossible by means of an hypothesis conceded at 
the beginning. Consequently, since the falsehood is established 
in reductions ad impossibile by an ostensive syllogism, and the 
original conclusion is proved hypothetically, and we have 
already stated that ostensive syllogisms are effected by means 
of these figures, it is evident that syllogisms per impossibile 
also will be made through these figures. Likewise all the other 
hypothetical syllogisms: for in every case the syllogism leads up 
to the proposition that is substituted for the original thesis; but 
the original thesis is reached by means of a concession or some 
other hypothesis. But if this is true, every demonstration and 
every syllogism must be formed by means of the three figures 
mentioned above. But when this has been shown it is clear that 
every syllogism is perfected by means of the first figure and is 
reducible to the universal syllogisms in this figure. 

Further in every syllogism one of the premisses must be 
affirmative, and universality must be present: unless one of the 
premisses is universal either a syllogism will not be possible, or 
it will not refer to the subject proposed, or the original position 
will be begged. Suppose we have to prove that pleasure in music 
is good. If one should claim as a premiss that pleasure is good 
without adding ‘all’, no syllogism will be possible; if one should 
claim that some pleasure is good, then if it is different from 
pleasure in music, it is not relevant to the subject proposed; if it 
is this very pleasure, one is assuming that which was proposed 
at the outset to be proved. This is more obvious in geometrical 
proofs, e.g. that the angles at the base of an isosceles triangle 
are equal. Suppose the lines A and B have been drawn to the 
centre. If then one should assume that the angle AC is equal to 


the angle BD, without claiming generally that angles of 
semicircles are equal; and again if one should assume that the 
angle C is equal to the angle D, without the additional 
assumption that every angle of a segment is equal to every 
other angle of the same segment; and further if one should 
assume that when equal angles are taken from the whole 
angles, which are themselves equal, the remainders E and F are 
equal, he will beg the thing to be proved, unless he also states 
that when equals are taken from equals the remainders are 
equal. 

It is clear then that in every syllogism there must be a universal 
premiss, and that a universal statement is proved only when all 
the premisses are universal, while a particular statement is 
proved both from two universal premisses and from one only: 
consequently if the conclusion is universal, the premisses also 
must be universal, but if the premisses are universal it is 
possible that the conclusion may not be universal. And it is 
clear also that in every syllogism either both or one of the 
premisses must be like the conclusion. I mean not only in being 
affirmative or negative, but also in being necessary, pure, 
problematic. We must consider also the other forms of 
predication. 

It is clear also when a syllogism in general can be made and 
when it cannot; and when a valid, when a perfect syllogism can 
be formed; and that if a syllogism is formed the terms must be 
arranged in one of the ways that have been mentioned. 

It is clear too that every demonstration will proceed through 
three terms and no more, unless the same conclusion is 



established by different pairs of propositions; e.g. the 
conclusion E may be established through the propositions A and 
B, and through the propositions C and D, or through the 
propositions A and B, or A and C, or B and C. For nothing 
prevents there being several middles for the same terms. But in 
that case there is not one but several syllogisms. Or again when 
each of the propositions A and B is obtained by syllogistic 
inference, e.g. by means of D and E, and again B by means of F 
and G. Or one may be obtained by syllogistic, the other by 
inductive inference. But thus also the syllogisms are many; for 
the conclusions are many, e.g. A and B and C. But if this can be 
called one syllogism, not many, the same conclusion may be 
reached by more than three terms in this way, but it cannot be 
reached as C is established by means of A and B. Suppose that 
the proposition E is inferred from the premisses A, B, C, and D. It 
is necessary then that of these one should be related to another 
as whole to part: for it has already been proved that if a 
syllogism is formed some of its terms must be related in this 
way. Suppose then that A stands in this relation to B. Some 
conclusion then follows from them. It must either be E or one or 
other of C and D, or something other than these. 

(1) If it is E the syllogism will have A and B for its sole premisses. 
But if C and D are so related that one is whole, the other part, 
some conclusion will follow from them also; and it must be 
either E, or one or other of the propositions A and B, or 
something other than these. And if it is (i) E, or (ii) A or B, either 
(i) the syllogisms will be more than one, or (ii) the same thing 
happens to be inferred by means of several terms only in the 
sense which we saw to be possible. But if (iii) the conclusion is 
other than E or A or B, the syllogisms will be many, and 
unconnected with one another. But if C is not so related to D as 
to make a syllogism, the propositions will have been assumed 
to no purpose, unless for the sake of induction or of obscuring 
the argument or something of the sort. 

(2) But if from the propositions A and B there follows not E but 
some other conclusion, and if from C and D either A or B follows 
or something else, then there are several syllogisms, and they 
do not establish the conclusion proposed: for we assumed that 
the syllogism proved E. And if no conclusion follows from C and 
D, it turns out that these propositions have been assumed to no 
purpose, and the syllogism does not prove the original 
proposition. 
So it is clear that every demonstration and every syllogism will 
proceed through three terms only. 

This being evident, it is clear that a syllogistic conclusion 
follows from two premisses and not from more than two. For 
the three terms make two premisses, unless a new premiss is 
assumed, as was said at the beginning, to perfect the 
syllogisms. It is clear therefore that in whatever syllogistic 
argument the premisses through which the main conclusion 
follows (for some of the preceding conclusions must be 
premisses) are not even in number, this argument either has 
not been drawn syllogistically or it has assumed more than was 
necessary to establish its thesis. 

If then syllogisms are taken with respect to their main 
premisses, every syllogism will consist of an even number of 
premisses and an odd number of terms (for the terms exceed 
the premisses by one), and the conclusions will be half the 
number of the premisses. But whenever a conclusion is reached 
by means of prosyllogisms or by means of several continuous 
middle terms, e.g. the proposition AB by means of the middle 
terms C and D, the number of the terms will similarly exceed 
that of the premisses by one (for the extra term must either be 
added outside or inserted: but in either case it follows that the 
relations of predication are one fewer than the terms related), 
and the premisses will be equal in number to the relations of 


predication. The premisses however will not always be even, the 
terms odd; but they will alternate – when the premisses are 
even, the terms must be odd; when the terms are even, the 
premisses must be odd: for along with one term one premiss is 
added, if a term is added from any quarter. Consequently since 
the premisses were (as we saw) even, and the terms odd, we 
must make them alternately even and odd at each addition. But 
the conclusions will not follow the same arrangement either in 
respect to the terms or to the premisses. For if one term is 
added, conclusions will be added less by one than the preexisting 
terms: for the conclusion is drawn not in relation to the 
single term last added, but in relation to all the rest, e.g. if to 
ABC the term D is added, two conclusions are thereby added, 
one in relation to A, the other in relation to B. Similarly with any 
further additions. And similarly too if the term is inserted in the 
middle: for in relation to one term only, a syllogism will not be 
constructed. Consequently the conclusions will be much more 
numerous than the terms or the premisses. 

Since we understand the subjects with which syllogisms are 
concerned, what sort of conclusion is established in each figure, 
and in how many moods this is done, it is evident to us both 
what sort of problem is difficult and what sort is easy to prove. 
For that which is concluded in many figures and through many 
moods is easier; that which is concluded in few figures and 
through few moods is more difficult to attempt. The universal 
affirmative is proved by means of the first figure only and by 
this in only one mood; the universal negative is proved both 
through the first figure and through the second, through the 
first in one mood, through the second in two. The particular 


affirmative is proved through the first and through the last 
figure, in one mood through the first, in three moods through 
the last. The particular negative is proved in all the figures, but 
once in the first, in two moods in the second, in three moods in 
the third. It is clear then that the universal affirmative is most 
difficult to establish, most easy to overthrow. In general, 
universals are easier game for the destroyer than particulars: 
for whether the predicate belongs to none or not to some, they 
are destroyed: and the particular negative is proved in all the 
figures, the universal negative in two. Similarly with universal 
negatives: the original statement is destroyed, whether the 
predicate belongs to all or to some: and this we found possible 
in two figures. But particular statements can be refuted in one 
way only – by proving that the predicate belongs either to all or 
to none. But particular statements are easier to establish: for 
proof is possible in more figures and through more moods. And 
in general we must not forget that it is possible to refute 
statements by means of one another, I mean, universal 
statements by means of particular, and particular statements by 
means of universal: but it is not possible to establish universal 
statements by means of particular, though it is possible to 
establish particular statements by means of universal. At the 
same time it is evident that it is easier to refute than to 
establish. 

The manner in which every syllogism is produced, the number 
of the terms and premisses through which it proceeds, the 
relation of the premisses to one another, the character of the 
problem proved in each figure, and the number of the figures 
appropriate to each problem, all these matters are clear from 
what has been said. 


We must now state how we may ourselves always have a supply 
of syllogisms in reference to the problem proposed and by what 
road we may reach the principles relative to the problem: for 
perhaps we ought not only to investigate the construction of 
syllogisms, but also to have the power of making them. 

Of all the things which exist some are such that they cannot be 
predicated of anything else truly and universally, e.g. Cleon and 
Callias, i.e. the individual and sensible, but other things may be 
predicated of them (for each of these is both man and animal); 
and some things are themselves predicated of others, but 
nothing prior is predicated of them; and some are predicated of 
others, and yet others of them, e.g. man of Callias and animal of 
man. It is clear then that some things are naturally not stated of 
anything: for as a rule each sensible thing is such that it cannot 
be predicated of anything, save incidentally: for we sometimes 
say that that white object is Socrates, or that that which 
approaches is Callias. We shall explain in another place that 
there is an upward limit also to the process of predicating: for 
the present we must assume this. Of these ultimate predicates 
it is not possible to demonstrate another predicate, save as a 
matter of opinion, but these may be predicated of other things. 
Neither can individuals be predicated of other things, though 
other things can be predicated of them. Whatever lies between 
these limits can be spoken of in both ways: they may be stated 
of others, and others stated of them. And as a rule arguments 
and inquiries are concerned with these things. We must select 
the premisses suitable to each problem in this manner: first we 
must lay down the subject and the definitions and the 
properties of the thing; next we must lay down those attributes 
which follow the thing, and again those which the thing follows, 
and those which cannot belong to it. But those to which it 
cannot belong need not be selected, because the negative 


statement implied above is convertible. Of the attributes which 
follow we must distinguish those which fall within the 
definition, those which are predicated as properties, and those 
which are predicated as accidents, and of the latter those which 
apparently and those which really belong. The larger the supply 
a man has of these, the more quickly will he reach a conclusion; 
and in proportion as he apprehends those which are truer, the 
more cogently will he demonstrate. But he must select not 
those which follow some particular but those which follow the 
thing as a whole, e.g. not what follows a particular man but 
what follows every man: for the syllogism proceeds through 
universal premisses. If the statement is indefinite, it is 
uncertain whether the premiss is universal, but if the statement 
is definite, the matter is clear. Similarly one must select those 
attributes which the subject follows as wholes, for the reason 
given. But that which follows one must not suppose to follow as 
a whole, e.g. that every animal follows man or every science 
music, but only that it follows, without qualification, and indeed 
we state it in a proposition: for the other statement is useless 
and impossible, e.g. that every man is every animal or justice is 
all good. But that which something follows receives the mark 
‘every’. Whenever the subject, for which we must obtain the 
attributes that follow, is contained by something else, what 
follows or does not follow the highest term universally must not 
be selected in dealing with the subordinate term (for these 
attributes have been taken in dealing with the superior term; for 
what follows animal also follows man, and what does not 
belong to animal does not belong to man); but we must choose 
those attributes which are peculiar to each subject. For some 
things are peculiar to the species as distinct from the genus; for 
species being distinct there must be attributes peculiar to each. 
Nor must we take as things which the superior term follows, 
those things which the inferior term follows, e.g. take as 
subjects of the predicate ‘animal’ what are really subjects of the 


predicate ‘man’. It is necessary indeed, if animal follows man, 
that it should follow all these also. But these belong more 
properly to the choice of what concerns man. One must 
apprehend also normal consequents and normal antecedents – 
for propositions which obtain normally are established 
syllogistically from premisses which obtain normally, some if 
not all of them having this character of normality. For the 
conclusion of each syllogism resembles its principles. We must 
not however choose attributes which are consequent upon all 
the terms: for no syllogism can be made out of such premisses. 
The reason why this is so will be clear in the sequel. 

If men wish to establish something about some whole, they 
must look to the subjects of that which is being established (the 
subjects of which it happens to be asserted), and the attributes 
which follow that of which it is to be predicated. For if any of 
these subjects is the same as any of these attributes, the 
attribute originally in question must belong to the subject 
originally in question. But if the purpose is to establish not a 
universal but a particular proposition, they must look for the 
terms of which the terms in question are predicable: for if any 
of these are identical, the attribute in question must belong to 
some of the subject in question. Whenever the one term has to 
belong to none of the other, one must look to the consequents 
of the subject, and to those attributes which cannot possibly be 
present in the predicate in question: or conversely to the 
attributes which cannot possibly be present in the subject, and 
to the consequents of the predicate. If any members of these 
groups are identical, one of the terms in question cannot 
possibly belong to any of the other. For sometimes a syllogism 


in the first figure results, sometimes a syllogism in the second. 
But if the object is to establish a particular negative proposition, 
we must find antecedents of the subject in question and 
attributes which cannot possibly belong to the predicate in 
question. If any members of these two groups are identical, it 
follows that one of the terms in question does not belong to 
some of the other. Perhaps each of these statements will 
become clearer in the following way. Suppose the consequents 
of A are designated by B, the antecedents of A by C, attributes 
which cannot possibly belong to A by D. Suppose again that the 
attributes of E are designated by F, the antecedents of E by G, 
and attributes which cannot belong to E by H. If then one of the 
Cs should be identical with one of the Fs, A must belong to all E: 
for F belongs to all E, and A to all C, consequently A belongs to 
all E. If C and G are identical, A must belong to some of the Es: 
for A follows C, and E follows all G. If F and D are identical, A 
will belong to none of the Es by a prosyllogism: for since the 
negative proposition is convertible, and F is identical with D, A 
will belong to none of the Fs, but F belongs to all E. Again, if B 
and H are identical, A will belong to none of the Es: for B will 
belong to all A, but to no E: for it was assumed to be identical 
with H, and H belonged to none of the Es. If D and G are 
identical, A will not belong to some of the Es: for it will not 
belong to G, because it does not belong to D: but G falls under E: 
consequently A will not belong to some of the Es. If B is 
identical with G, there will be a converted syllogism: for E will 
belong to all A since B belongs to A and E to B (for B was found 
to be identical with G): but that A should belong to all E is not 
necessary, but it must belong to some E because it is possible to 
convert the universal statement into a particular. 

It is clear then that in every proposition which requires proof 
we must look to the aforesaid relations of the subject and 
predicate in question: for all syllogisms proceed through these. 
But if we are seeking consequents and antecedents we must 


look for those which are primary and most universal, e.g. in 
reference to E we must look to KF rather than to F alone, and in 
reference to A we must look to KC rather than to C alone. For if 
A belongs to KF, it belongs both to F and to E: but if it does not 
follow KF, it may yet follow F. Similarly we must consider the 
antecedents of A itself: for if a term follows the primary 
antecedents, it will follow those also which are subordinate, but 
if it does not follow the former, it may yet follow the latter. 

It is clear too that the inquiry proceeds through the three terms 
and the two premisses, and that all the syllogisms proceed 
through the aforesaid figures. For it is proved that A belongs to 
all E, whenever an identical term is found among the Cs and Fs. 
This will be the middle term; A and E will be the extremes. So 
the first figure is formed. And A will belong to some E, whenever 
C and G are apprehended to be the same. This is the last figure: 
for G becomes the middle term. And A will belong to no E, when 
D and F are identical. Thus we have both the first figure and the 
middle figure; the first, because A belongs to no F, since the 
negative statement is convertible, and F belongs to all E: the 
middle figure because D belongs to no A, and to all E. And A will 
not belong to some E, whenever D and G are identical. This is 
the last figure: for A will belong to no G, and E will belong to all 

G. Clearly then all syllogisms proceed through the aforesaid 
figures, and we must not select consequents of all the terms, 
because no syllogism is produced from them. For (as we saw) it 
is not possible at all to establish a proposition from 
consequents, and it is not possible to refute by means of a 
consequent of both the terms in question: for the middle term 
must belong to the one, and not belong to the other. 
It is clear too that other methods of inquiry by selection of 
middle terms are useless to produce a syllogism, e.g. if the 
consequents of the terms in question are identical, or if the 
antecedents of A are identical with those attributes which 


cannot possibly belong to E, or if those attributes are identical 
which cannot belong to either term: for no syllogism is 
produced by means of these. For if the consequents are 
identical, e.g. B and F, we have the middle figure with both 
premisses affirmative: if the antecedents of A are identical with 
attributes which cannot belong to E, e.g. C with H, we have the 
first figure with its minor premiss negative. If attributes which 
cannot belong to either term are identical, e.g. C and H, both 
premisses are negative, either in the first or in the middle 
figure. But no syllogism is possible in this way. 

It is evident too that we must find out which terms in this 
inquiry are identical, not which are different or contrary, first 
because the object of our investigation is the middle term, and 
the middle term must be not diverse but identical. Secondly, 
wherever it happens that a syllogism results from taking 
contraries or terms which cannot belong to the same thing, all 
arguments can be reduced to the aforesaid moods, e.g. if B and F 
are contraries or cannot belong to the same thing. For if these 
are taken, a syllogism will be formed to prove that A belongs to 
none of the Es, not however from the premisses taken but in the 
aforesaid mood. For B will belong to all A and to no E. 
Consequently B must be identical with one of the Hs. Again, if B 
and G cannot belong to the same thing, it follows that A will not 
belong to some of the Es: for then too we shall have the middle 
figure: for B will belong to all A and to no G. Consequently B 
must be identical with some of the Hs. For the fact that B and G 
cannot belong to the same thing differs in no way from the fact 
that B is identical with some of the Hs: for that includes 
everything which cannot belong to E. 

It is clear then that from the inquiries taken by themselves no 
syllogism results; but if B and F are contraries B must be 
identical with one of the Hs, and the syllogism results through 
these terms. It turns out then that those who inquire in this 


manner are looking gratuitously for some other way than the 
necessary way because they have failed to observe the identity 
of the Bs with the Hs. 

Syllogisms which lead to impossible conclusions are similar to 
ostensive syllogisms; they also are formed by means of the 
consequents and antecedents of the terms in question. In both 
cases the same inquiry is involved. For what is proved 
ostensively may also be concluded syllogistically per 
impossibile by means of the same terms; and what is proved 
per impossibile may also be proved ostensively, e.g. that A 
belongs to none of the Es. For suppose A to belong to some E: 
then since B belongs to all A and A to some of the Es, B will 
belong to some of the Es: but it was assumed that it belongs to 
none. Again we may prove that A belongs to some E: for if A 
belonged to none of the Es, and E belongs to all G, A will belong 
to none of the Gs: but it was assumed to belong to all. Similarly 
with the other propositions requiring proof. The proof per 
impossibile will always and in all cases be from the 
consequents and antecedents of the terms in question. 
Whatever the problem the same inquiry is necessary whether 
one wishes to use an ostensive syllogism or a reduction to 
impossibility. For both the demonstrations start from the same 
terms, e.g. suppose it has been proved that A belongs to no E, 
because it turns out that otherwise B belongs to some of the Es 
and this is impossible – if now it is assumed that B belongs to 
no E and to all A, it is clear that A will belong to no E. Again if it 
has been proved by an ostensive syllogism that A belongs to no 
E, assume that A belongs to some E and it will be proved per 
impossibile to belong to no E. Similarly with the rest. In all cases 


it is necessary to find some common term other than the 
subjects of inquiry, to which the syllogism establishing the false 
conclusion may relate, so that if this premiss is converted, and 
the other remains as it is, the syllogism will be ostensive by 
means of the same terms. For the ostensive syllogism differs 
from the reductio ad impossibile in this: in the ostensive 
syllogism both remisses are laid down in accordance with the 
truth, in the reductio ad impossibile one of the premisses is 
assumed falsely. 

These points will be made clearer by the sequel, when we 
discuss the reduction to impossibility: at present this much 
must be clear, that we must look to terms of the kinds 
mentioned whether we wish to use an ostensive syllogism or a 
reduction to impossibility. In the other hypothetical syllogisms, 
I mean those which proceed by substitution, or by positing a 
certain quality, the inquiry will be directed to the terms of the 
problem to be proved – not the terms of the original problem, 
but the new terms introduced; and the method of the inquiry 
will be the same as before. But we must consider and determine 
in how many ways hypothetical syllogisms are possible. 

Each of the problems then can be proved in the manner 
described; but it is possible to establish some of them 
syllogistically in another way, e.g. universal problems by the 
inquiry which leads up to a particular conclusion, with the 
addition of an hypothesis. For if the Cs and the Gs should be 
identical, but E should be assumed to belong to the Gs only, 
then A would belong to every E: and again if the Ds and the Gs 
should be identical, but E should be predicated of the Gs only, it 
follows that A will belong to none of the Es. Clearly then we 
must consider the matter in this way also. The method is the 
same whether the relation is necessary or possible. For the 
inquiry will be the same, and the syllogism will proceed through 
terms arranged in the same order whether a possible or a pure 


proposition is proved. We must find in the case of possible 
relations, as well as terms that belong, terms which can belong 
though they actually do not: for we have proved that the 
syllogism which establishes a possible relation proceeds 
through these terms as well. Similarly also with the other 
modes of predication. 

It is clear then from what has been said not only that all 
syllogisms can be formed in this way, but also that they cannot 
be formed in any other. For every syllogism has been proved to 
be formed through one of the aforementioned figures, and 
these cannot be composed through other terms than the 
consequents and antecedents of the terms in question: for from 
these we obtain the premisses and find the middle term. 
Consequently a syllogism cannot be formed by means of other 
terms. 

The method is the same in all cases, in philosophy, in any art or 
study. We must look for the attributes and the subjects of both 
our terms, and we must supply ourselves with as many of these 
as possible, and consider them by means of the three terms, 
refuting statements in one way, confirming them in another, in 
the pursuit of truth starting from premisses in which the 
arrangement of the terms is in accordance with truth, while if 
we look for dialectical syllogisms we must start from probable 
premisses. The principles of syllogisms have been stated in 
general terms, both how they are characterized and how we 
must hunt for them, so as not to look to everything that is said 
about the terms of the problem or to the same points whether 
we are confirming or refuting, or again whether we are 


confirming of all or of some, and whether we are refuting of all 
or some. we must look to fewer points and they must be 
definite. We have also stated how we must select with reference 
to everything that is, e.g. about good or knowledge. But in each 
science the principles which are peculiar are the most 
numerous. Consequently it is the business of experience to give 
the principles which belong to each subject. I mean for example 
that astronomical experience supplies the principles of 
astronomical science: for once the phenomena were adequately 
apprehended, the demonstrations of astronomy were 
discovered. Similarly with any other art or science. 
Consequently, if the attributes of the thing are apprehended, 
our business will then be to exhibit readily the demonstrations. 
For if none of the true attributes of things had been omitted in 
the historical survey, we should be able to discover the proof 
and demonstrate everything which admitted of proof, and to 
make that clear, whose nature does not admit of proof. 

In general then we have explained fairly well how we must 
select premisses: we have discussed the matter accurately in 
the treatise concerning dialectic. 

It is easy to see that division into classes is a small part of the 
method we have described: for division is, so to speak, a weak 
syllogism; for what it ought to prove, it begs, and it always 
establishes something more general than the attribute in 
question. First, this very point had escaped all those who used 
the method of division; and they attempted to persuade men 
that it was possible to make a demonstration of substance and 
essence. Consequently they did not understand what it is 


possible to prove syllogistically by division, nor did they 
understand that it was possible to prove syllogistically in the 
manner we have described. In demonstrations, when there is a 
need to prove a positive statement, the middle term through 
which the syllogism is formed must always be inferior to and 
not comprehend the first of the extremes. But division has a 
contrary intention: for it takes the universal as middle. Let 
animal be the term signified by A, mortal by B, and immortal by 
C, and let man, whose definition is to be got, be signified by D. 
The man who divides assumes that every animal is either 
mortal or immortal: i.e. whatever is A is all either B or C. Again, 
always dividing, he lays it down that man is an animal, so he 
assumes A of D as belonging to it. Now the true conclusion is 
that every D is either B or C, consequently man must be either 
mortal or immortal, but it is not necessary that man should be a 
mortal animal – this is begged: and this is what ought to have 
been proved syllogistically. And again, taking A as mortal 
animal, B as footed, C as footless, and D as man, he assumes in 
the same way that A inheres either in B or in C (for every mortal 
animal is either footed or footless), and he assumes A of D (for 
he assumed man, as we saw, to be a mortal animal); 
consequently it is necessary that man should be either a footed 
or a footless animal; but it is not necessary that man should be 
footed: this he assumes: and it is just this again which he ought 
to have demonstrated. Always dividing then in this way it turns 
out that these logicians assume as middle the universal term, 
and as extremes that which ought to have been the subject of 
demonstration and the differentiae. In conclusion, they do not 
make it clear, and show it to be necessary, that this is man or 
whatever the subject of inquiry may be: for they pursue the 
other method altogether, never even suspecting the presence of 
the rich supply of evidence which might be used. It is clear that 
it is neither possible to refute a statement by this method of 
division, nor to draw a conclusion about an accident or property 


of a thing, nor about its genus, nor in cases in which it is 
unknown whether it is thus or thus, e.g. whether the diagonal is 
incommensurate. For if he assumes that every length is either 
commensurate or incommensurate, and the diagonal is a 
length, he has proved that the diagonal is either 
incommensurate or commensurate. But if he should assume 
that it is incommensurate, he will have assumed what he ought 
to have proved. He cannot then prove it: for this is his method, 
but proof is not possible by this method. Let A stand for 
‘incommensurate or commensurate’, B for ‘length’, C for 
‘diagonal’. It is clear then that this method of investigation is 
not suitable for every inquiry, nor is it useful in those cases in 
which it is thought to be most suitable. 

From what has been said it is clear from what elements 
demonstrations are formed and in what manner, and to what 
points we must look in each problem. 

Our next business is to state how we can reduce syllogisms to 
the aforementioned figures: for this part of the inquiry still 
remains. If we should investigate the production of the 
syllogisms and had the power of discovering them, and further 
if we could resolve the syllogisms produced into the 
aforementioned figures, our original problem would be brought 
to a conclusion. It will happen at the same time that what has 
been already said will be confirmed and its truth made clearer 
by what we are about to say. For everything that is true must in 
every respect agree with itself First then we must attempt to 
select the two premisses of the syllogism (for it is easier to 
divide into large parts than into small, and the composite parts 


are larger than the elements out of which they are made); next 
we must inquire which are universal and which particular, and 
if both premisses have not been stated, we must ourselves 
assume the one which is missing. For sometimes men put 
forward the universal premiss, but do not posit the premiss 
which is contained in it, either in writing or in discussion: or 
men put forward the premisses of the principal syllogism, but 
omit those through which they are inferred, and invite the 
concession of others to no purpose. We must inquire then 
whether anything unnecessary has been assumed, or anything 
necessary has been omitted, and we must posit the one and 
take away the other, until we have reached the two premisses: 
for unless we have these, we cannot reduce arguments put 
forward in the way described. In some arguments it is easy to 
see what is wanting, but some escape us, and appear to be 
syllogisms, because something necessary results from what has 
been laid down, e.g. if the assumptions were made that 
substance is not annihilated by the annihilation of what is not 
substance, and that if the elements out of which a thing is 
made are annihilated, then that which is made out of them is 
destroyed: these propositions being laid down, it is necessary 
that any part of substance is substance; this has not however 
been drawn by syllogism from the propositions assumed, but 
premisses are wanting. Again if it is necessary that animal 
should exist, if man does, and that substance should exist, if 
animal does, it is necessary that substance should exist if man 
does: but as yet the conclusion has not been drawn 
syllogistically: for the premisses are not in the shape we 
required. We are deceived in such cases because something 
necessary results from what is assumed, since the syllogism 
also is necessary. But that which is necessary is wider than the 
syllogism: for every syllogism is necessary, but not everything 
which is necessary is a syllogism. Consequently, though 
something results when certain propositions are assumed, we 


must not try to reduce it directly, but must first state the two 
premisses, then divide them into their terms. We must take that 
term as middle which is stated in both the remisses: for it is 
necessary that the middle should be found in both premisses in 
all the figures. 

If then the middle term is a predicate and a subject of 
predication, or if it is a predicate, and something else is denied 
of it, we shall have the first figure: if it both is a predicate and is 
denied of something, the middle figure: if other things are 
predicated of it, or one is denied, the other predicated, the last 
figure. For it was thus that we found the middle term placed in 
each figure. It is placed similarly too if the premisses are not 
universal: for the middle term is determined in the same way. 
Clearly then, if the same term is not stated more than once in 
the course of an argument, a syllogism cannot be made: for a 
middle term has not been taken. Since we know what sort of 
thesis is established in each figure, and in which the universal, 
in what sort the particular is described, clearly we must not 
look for all the figures, but for that which is appropriate to the 
thesis in hand. If the thesis is established in more figures than 
one, we shall recognize the figure by the position of the middle 
term. 

Men are frequently deceived about syllogisms because the 
inference is necessary, as has been said above; sometimes they 
are deceived by the similarity in the positing of the terms; and 
this ought not to escape our notice. E.g. if A is stated of B, and B 
of C: it would seem that a syllogism is possible since the terms 
stand thus: but nothing necessary results, nor does a syllogism. 


Let A represent the term ‘being eternal’, B ‘Aristomenes as an 
object of thought’, C ‘Aristomenes’. It is true then that A belongs 
to B. For Aristomenes as an object of thought is eternal. But B 
also belongs to C: for Aristomenes is Aristomenes as an object 
of thought. But A does not belong to C: for Aristomenes is 
perishable. For no syllogism was made although the terms 
stood thus: that required that the premiss AB should be stated 
universally. But this is false, that every Aristomenes who is an 
object of thought is eternal, since Aristomenes is perishable. 
Again let C stand for ‘Miccalus’, B for ‘musical Miccalus’, A for 
‘perishing to-morrow’. It is true to predicate B of C: for Miccalus 
is musical Miccalus. Also A can be predicated of B: for musical 
Miccalus might perish to-morrow. But to state A of C is false at 
any rate. This argument then is identical with the former; for it 
is not true universally that musical Miccalus perishes tomorrow: 
but unless this is assumed, no syllogism (as we have 
shown) is possible. 

This deception then arises through ignoring a small distinction. 
For if we accept the conclusion as though it made no difference 
whether we said ‘This belong to that’ or ‘This belongs to all of 
that’. 

Men will frequently fall into fallacies through not setting out 
the terms of the premiss well, e.g. suppose A to be health, B 
disease, C man. It is true to say that A cannot belong to any B 
(for health belongs to no disease) and again that B belongs to 
every C (for every man is capable of disease). It would seem to 
follow that health cannot belong to any man. The reason for 
this is that the terms are not set out well in the statement, since 


if the things which are in the conditions are substituted, no 
syllogism can be made, e.g. if ‘healthy’ is substituted for ‘health’ 
and ‘diseased’ for ‘disease’. For it is not true to say that being 
healthy cannot belong to one who is diseased. But unless this is 
assumed no conclusion results, save in respect of possibility: 
but such a conclusion is not impossible: for it is possible that 
health should belong to no man. Again the fallacy may occur in 
a similar way in the middle figure: ‘it is not possible that health 
should belong to any disease, but it is possible that health 
should belong to every man, consequently it is not possible that 
disease should belong to any man’. In the third figure the fallacy 
results in reference to possibility. For health and diseae and 
knowledge and ignorance, and in general contraries, may 
possibly belong to the same thing, but cannot belong to one 
another. This is not in agreement with what was said before: for 
we stated that when several things could belong to the same 
thing, they could belong to one another. 

It is evident then that in all these cases the fallacy arises from 
the setting out of the terms: for if the things that are in the 
conditions are substituted, no fallacy arises. It is clear then that 
in such premisses what possesses the condition ought always 
to be substituted for the condition and taken as the term. 

We must not always seek to set out the terms a single word: for 
we shall often have complexes of words to which a single name 
is not given. Hence it is difficult to reduce syllogisms with such 
terms. Sometimes too fallacies will result from such a search, 

e.g. the belief that syllogism can establish that which has no 
mean. Let A stand for two right angles, B for triangle, C for 

isosceles triangle. A then belongs to C because of B: but A 
belongs to B without the mediation of another term: for the 
triangle in virtue of its own nature contains two right angles, 
consequently there will be no middle term for the proposition 
AB, although it is demonstrable. For it is clear that the middle 
must not always be assumed to be an individual thing, but 
sometimes a complex of words, as happens in the case 
mentioned. 

That the first term belongs to the middle, and the middle to the 
extreme, must not be understood in the sense that they can 
always be predicated of one another or that the first term will 
be predicated of the middle in the same way as the middle is 
predicated of the last term. The same holds if the premisses are 
negative. But we must suppose the verb ‘to belong’ to have as 
many meanings as the senses in which the verb ‘to be’ is used, 
and in which the assertion that a thing ‘is’ may be said to be 
true. Take for example the statement that there is a single 
science of contraries. Let A stand for ‘there being a single 
science’, and B for things which are contrary to one another. 
Then A belongs to B, not in the sense that contraries are the fact 
of there being a single science of them, but in the sense that it 
is true to say of the contraries that there is a single science of 
them. 

It happens sometimes that the first term is stated of the middle, 
but the middle is not stated of the third term, e.g. if wisdom is 
knowledge, and wisdom is of the good, the conclusion is that 
there is knowledge of the good. The good then is not knowledge, 
though wisdom is knowledge. Sometimes the middle term is 


stated of the third, but the first is not stated of the middle, e.g. if 
there is a science of everything that has a quality, or is a 
contrary, and the good both is a contrary and has a quality, the 
conclusion is that there is a science of the good, but the good is 
not science, nor is that which has a quality or is a contrary, 
though the good is both of these. Sometimes neither the first 
term is stated of the middle, nor the middle of the third, while 
the first is sometimes stated of the third, and sometimes not: 

e.g. if there is a genus of that of which there is a science, and if 
there is a science of the good, we conclude that there is a genus 
of the good. But nothing is predicated of anything. And if that of 
which there is a science is a genus, and if there is a science of 
the good, we conclude that the good is a genus. The first term 
then is predicated of the extreme, but in the premisses one 
thing is not stated of another. 
The same holds good where the relation is negative. For ‘that 
does not belong to this’ does not always mean that ‘this is not 
that’, but sometimes that ‘this is not of that’ or ‘for that’, e.g. 
‘there is not a motion of a motion or a becoming of a becoming, 
but there is a becoming of pleasure: so pleasure is not a 
becoming.’ Or again it may be said that there is a sign of 
laughter, but there is not a sign of a sign, consequently laughter 
is not a sign. This holds in the other cases too, in which the 
thesis is refuted because the genus is asserted in a particular 
way, in relation to the terms of the thesis. Again take the 
inference ‘opportunity is not the right time: for opportunity 
belongs to God, but the right time does not, since nothing is 
useful to God’. We must take as terms opportunity-right time-
God: but the premiss must be understood according to the case 
of the noun. For we state this universally without qualification, 
that the terms ought always to be stated in the nominative, e.g. 
man, good, contraries, not in oblique cases, e.g. of man, of a 
good, of contraries, but the premisses ought to be understood 
with reference to the cases of each term –either the dative, e.g. 


‘equal to this’, or the genitive, e.g. ‘double of this’, or the 
accusative, e.g. ‘that which strikes or sees this’, or the 
nominative, e.g. ‘man is an animal’, or in whatever other way 
the word falls in the premiss. 

37 

The expressions ‘this belongs to that’ and ‘this holds true of 
that’ must be understood in as many ways as there are different 
categories, and these categories must be taken either with or 
without qualification, and further as simple or compound: the 
same holds good of the corresponding negative expressions. We 
must consider these points and define them better. 

38 

A term which is repeated in the premisses ought to be joined to 
the first extreme, not to the middle. I mean for example that if a 
syllogism should be made proving that there is knowledge of 
justice, that it is good, the expression ‘that it is good’ (or ‘qua 
good’) should be joined to the first term. Let A stand for 
‘knowledge that it is good’, B for good, C for justice. It is true to 
predicate A of B. For of the good there is knowledge that it is 
good. Also it is true to predicate B of C. For justice is identical 
with a good. In this way an analysis of the argument can be 
made. But if the expression ‘that it is good’ were added to B, the 
conclusion will not follow: for A will be true of B, but B will not 
be true of C. For to predicate of justice the term ‘good that it is 
good’ is false and not intelligible. Similarly if it should be proved 


that the healthy is an object of knowledge qua good, of goat-
stag an object of knowledge qua not existing, or man perishable 
qua an object of sense: in every case in which an addition is 
made to the predicate, the addition must be joined to the 
extreme. 

The position of the terms is not the same when something is 
established without qualification and when it is qualified by 
some attribute or condition, e.g. when the good is proved to be 
an object of knowledge and when it is proved to be an object of 
knowledge that it is good. If it has been proved to be an object of 
knowledge without qualification, we must put as middle term 
‘that which is’, but if we add the qualification ‘that it is good’, 
the middle term must be ‘that which is something’. Let A stand 
for ‘knowledge that it is something’, B stand for ‘something’, 
and C stand for ‘good’. It is true to predicate A of B: for ex 
hypothesi there is a science of that which is something, that it 
is something. B too is true of C: for that which C represents is 
something. Consequently A is true of C: there will then be 
knowledge of the good, that it is good: for ex hypothesi the term 
‘something’ indicates the thing’s special nature. But if ‘being’ 
were taken as middle and ‘being’ simply were joined to the 
extreme, not ‘being something’, we should not have had a 
syllogism proving that there is knowledge of the good, that it is 
good, but that it is; e.g. let A stand for knowledge that it is, B for 
being, C for good. Clearly then in syllogisms which are thus 
limited we must take the terms in the way stated. 

We ought also to exchange terms which have the same value, 
word for word, and phrase for phrase, and word and phrase, and 



always take a word in preference to a phrase: for thus the 
setting out of the terms will be easier. For example if it makes 
no difference whether we say that the supposable is not the 
genus of the opinable or that the opinable is not identical with a 
particular kind of supposable (for what is meant is the same in 
both statements), it is better to take as the terms the 
supposable and the opinable in preference to the phrase 
suggested. 

40 

Since the expressions ‘pleasure is good’ and ‘pleasure is the 
good’ are not identical, we must not set out the terms in the 
same way; but if the syllogism is to prove that pleasure is the 
good, the term must be ‘the good’, but if the object is to prove 
that pleasure is good, the term will be ‘good’. Similarly in all 
other cases. 

41 

It is not the same, either in fact or in speech, that A belongs to 
all of that to which B belongs, and that A belongs to all of that to 
all of which B belongs: for nothing prevents B from belonging to 
C, though not to all C: e.g. let B stand for beautiful, and C for 
white. If beauty belongs to something white, it is true to say 
that beauty belongs to that which is white; but not perhaps to 
everything that is white. If then A belongs to B, but not to 
everything of which B is predicated, then whether B belongs to 
all C or merely belongs to C, it is not necessary that A should 


belong, I do not say to all C, but even to C at all. But if A belongs 
to everything of which B is truly stated, it will follow that A can 
be said of all of that of all of which B is said. If however A is said 
of that of all of which B may be said, nothing prevents B 
belonging to C, and yet A not belonging to all C or to any C at all. 
If then we take three terms it is clear that the expression ‘A is 
said of all of which B is said’ means this, ‘A is said of all the 
things of which B is said’. And if B is said of all of a third term, 
so also is A: but if B is not said of all of the third term, there is 
no necessity that A should be said of all of it. 

We must not suppose that something absurd results through 
setting out the terms: for we do not use the existence of this 
particular thing, but imitate the geometrician who says that 
‘this line a foot long’ or ‘this straight line’ or ‘this line without 
breadth’ exists although it does not, but does not use the 
diagrams in the sense that he reasons from them. For in 
general, if two things are not related as whole to part and part 
to whole, the prover does not prove from them, and so no 
syllogism a is formed. We (I mean the learner) use the process 
of setting out terms like perception by sense, not as though it 
were impossible to demonstrate without these illustrative 
terms, as it is to demonstrate without the premisses of the 
syllogism. 

We should not forget that in the same syllogism not all 
conclusions are reached through one figure, but one through 
one figure, another through another. Clearly then we must 
analyse arguments in accordance with this. Since not every 
problem is proved in every figure, but certain problems in each 


figure, it is clear from the conclusion in what figure the 
premisses should be sought. 

43 

In reference to those arguments aiming at a definition which 
have been directed to prove some part of the definition, we 
must take as a term the point to which the argument has been 
directed, not the whole definition: for so we shall be less likely 
to be disturbed by the length of the term: e.g. if a man proves 
that water is a drinkable liquid, we must take as terms 
drinkable and water. 

44 

Further we must not try to reduce hypothetical syllogisms; for 
with the given premisses it is not possible to reduce them. For 
they have not been proved by syllogism, but assented to by 
agreement. For instance if a man should suppose that unless 
there is one faculty of contraries, there cannot be one science, 
and should then argue that not every faculty is of contraries, e.g. 
of what is healthy and what is sickly: for the same thing will 
then be at the same time healthy and sickly. He has shown that 
there is not one faculty of all contraries, but he has not proved 
that there is not a science. And yet one must agree. But the 
agreement does not come from a syllogism, but from an 
hypothesis. This argument cannot be reduced: but the proof 
that there is not a single faculty can. The latter argument 
perhaps was a syllogism: but the former was an hypothesis. 


The same holds good of arguments which are brought to a 
conclusion per impossibile. These cannot be analysed either; 
but the reduction to what is impossible can be analysed since it 
is proved by syllogism, though the rest of the argument cannot, 
because the conclusion is reached from an hypothesis. But 
these differ from the previous arguments: for in the former a 
preliminary agreement must be reached if one is to accept the 
conclusion; e.g. an agreement that if there is proved to be one 
faculty of contraries, then contraries fall under the same 
science; whereas in the latter, even if no preliminary agreement 
has been made, men still accept the reasoning, because the 
falsity is patent, e.g. the falsity of what follows from the 
assumption that the diagonal is commensurate, viz. that then 
odd numbers are equal to evens. 

Many other arguments are brought to a conclusion by the help 
of an hypothesis; these we ought to consider and mark out 
clearly. We shall describe in the sequel their differences, and the 
various ways in which hypothetical arguments are formed: but 
at present this much must be clear, that it is not possible to 
resolve such arguments into the figures. And we have explained 
the reason. 

Whatever problems are proved in more than one figure, if they 
have been established in one figure by syllogism, can be 
reduced to another figure, e.g. a negative syllogism in the first 
figure can be reduced to the second, and a syllogism in the 
middle figure to the first, not all however but some only. The 
point will be clear in the sequel. If A belongs to no B, and B to all 
C, then A belongs to no C. Thus the first figure; but if the 


negative statement is converted, we shall have the middle 
figure. For B belongs to no A, and to all C. Similarly if the 
syllogism is not universal but particular, e.g. if A belongs to no B, 
and B to some C. Convert the negative statement and you will 
have the middle figure. 

The universal syllogisms in the second figure can be reduced to 
the first, but only one of the two particular syllogisms. Let A 
belong to no B and to all C. Convert the negative statement, and 
you will have the first figure. For B will belong to no A and A to 
all C. But if the affirmative statement concerns B, and the 
negative C, C must be made first term. For C belongs to no A, 
and A to all B: therefore C belongs to no B. B then belongs to no 

C: for the negative statement is convertible. 
But if the syllogism is particular, whenever the negative 
statement concerns the major extreme, reduction to the first 
figure will be possible, e.g. if A belongs to no B and to some C: 
convert the negative statement and you will have the first 
figure. For B will belong to no A and A to some C. But when the 
affirmative statement concerns the major extreme, no 
resolution will be possible, e.g. if A belongs to all B, but not to all 

C: for the statement AB does not admit of conversion, nor would 
there be a syllogism if it did. 
Again syllogisms in the third figure cannot all be resolved into 
the first, though all syllogisms in the first figure can be resolved 
into the third. Let A belong to all B and B to some C. Since the 
particular affirmative is convertible, C will belong to some B: but 
A belonged to all B: so that the third figure is formed. Similarly 
if the syllogism is negative: for the particular affirmative is 
convertible: therefore A will belong to no B, and to some C. 

Of the syllogisms in the last figure one only cannot be resolved 
into the first, viz. when the negative statement is not universal: 
all the rest can be resolved. Let A and B be affirmed of all C: 


then C can be converted partially with either A or B: C then 
belongs to some B. Consequently we shall get the first figure, if 
A belongs to all C, and C to some of the Bs. If A belongs to all C 
and B to some C, the argument is the same: for B is convertible 
in reference to C. But if B belongs to all C and A to some C, the 
first term must be B: for B belongs to all C, and C to some A, 
therefore B belongs to some A. But since the particular 
statement is convertible, A will belong to some B. If the 
syllogism is negative, when the terms are universal we must 
take them in a similar way. Let B belong to all C, and A to no C: 
then C will belong to some B, and A to no C; and so C will be 
middle term. Similarly if the negative statement is universal, 
the affirmative particular: for A will belong to no C, and C to 
some of the Bs. But if the negative statement is particular, no 
resolution will be possible, e.g. if B belongs to all C, and A not 
belong to some C: convert the statement BC and both premisses 
will be particular. 

It is clear that in order to resolve the figures into one another 
the premiss which concerns the minor extreme must be 
converted in both the figures: for when this premiss is altered, 
the transition to the other figure is made. 

One of the syllogisms in the middle figure can, the other 
cannot, be resolved into the third figure. Whenever the 
universal statement is negative, resolution is possible. For if A 
belongs to no B and to some C, both B and C alike are 
convertible in relation to A, so that B belongs to no A and C to 
some A. A therefore is middle term. But when A belongs to all B, 
and not to some C, resolution will not be possible: for neither of 
the premisses is universal after conversion. 

Syllogisms in the third figure can be resolved into the middle 
figure, whenever the negative statement is universal, e.g. if A 
belongs to no C, and B to some or all C. For C then will belong to 


no A and to some B. But if the negative statement is particular, 
no resolution will be possible: for the particular negative does 
not admit of conversion. 

It is clear then that the same syllogisms cannot be resolved in 
these figures which could not be resolved into the first figure, 
and that when syllogisms are reduced to the first figure these 
alone are confirmed by reduction to what is impossible. 

It is clear from what we have said how we ought to reduce 
syllogisms, and that the figures may be resolved into one 
another. 

In establishing or refuting, it makes some difference whether 
we suppose the expressions ‘not to be this’ and ‘to be not-this’ 
are identical or different in meaning, e.g. ‘not to be white’ and 
‘to be not-white’. For they do not mean the same thing, nor is 
‘to be not-white’ the negation of ‘to be white’, but ‘not to be 
white’. The reason for this is as follows. The relation of ‘he can 
walk’ to ‘he can not-walk’ is similar to the relation of ‘it is 
white’ to ‘it is not-white’; so is that of ‘he knows what is good’ 
to ‘he knows what is not-good’. For there is no difference 
between the expressions ‘he knows what is good’ and ‘he is 
knowing what is good’, or ‘he can walk’ and ‘he is able to walk’: 
therefore there is no difference between their contraries ‘he 
cannot walk’-’he is not able to walk’. If then ‘he is not able to 
walk’ means the same as ‘he is able not to walk’, capacity to 
walk and incapacity to walk will belong at the same time to the 
same person (for the same man can both walk and not-walk, 
and is possessed of knowledge of what is good and of what is 
not-good), but an affirmation and a denial which are opposed to 


one another do not belong at the same time to the same thing. 
As then ‘not to know what is good’ is not the same as ‘to know 
what is not good’, so ‘to be not-good’ is not the same as ‘not to 
be good’. For when two pairs correspond, if the one pair are 
different from one another, the other pair also must be 
different. Nor is ‘to be not-equal’ the same as ‘not to be equal’: 
for there is something underlying the one, viz. that which is 
not-equal, and this is the unequal, but there is nothing 
underlying the other. Wherefore not everything is either equal 
or unequal, but everything is equal or is not equal. Further the 
expressions ‘it is a not-white log’ and ‘it is not a white log’ do 
not imply one another’s truth. For if ‘it is a not-white log’, it 
must be a log: but that which is not a white log need not be a 
log at all. Therefore it is clear that ‘it is not-good’ is not the 
denial of ‘it is good’. If then every single statement may truly be 
said to be either an affirmation or a negation, if it is not a 
negation clearly it must in a sense be an affirmation. But every 
affirmation has a corresponding negation. The negation then of 
‘it is not-good’ is ‘it is not not-good’. The relation of these 
statements to one another is as follows. Let A stand for ‘to be 
good’, B for ‘not to be good’, let C stand for ‘to be not-good’ and 
be placed under B, and let D stand for not to be not-good’ and 
be placed under A. Then either A or B will belong to everything, 
but they will never belong to the same thing; and either C or D 
will belong to everything, but they will never belong to the same 
thing. And B must belong to everything to which C belongs. For 
if it is true to say ‘it is a not-white’, it is true also to say ‘it is not 
white’: for it is impossible that a thing should simultaneously 
be white and be not-white, or be a not-white log and be a white 
log; consequently if the affirmation does not belong, the denial 
must belong. But C does not always belong to B: for what is not 
a log at all, cannot be a not-white log either. On the other hand 
D belongs to everything to which A belongs. For either C or D 
belongs to everything to which A belongs. But since a thing 


cannot be simultaneously not-white and white, D must belong 
to everything to which A belongs. For of that which is white it is 
true to say that it is not not-white. But A is not true of all D. For 
of that which is not a log at all it is not true to say A, viz. that it 
is a white log. Consequently D is true, but A is not true, i.e. that 
it is a white log. It is clear also that A and C cannot together 
belong to the same thing, and that B and D may possibly belong 
to the same thing. 

Privative terms are similarly related positive ter terms respect of 
this arrangement. Let A stand for ‘equal’, B for ‘not equal’, C for 
‘unequal’, D for ‘not unequal’. 

In many things also, to some of which something belongs which 
does not belong to others, the negation may be true in a similar 
way, viz. that all are not white or that each is not white, while 
that each is not-white or all are not-white is false. Similarly also 
‘every animal is not-white’ is not the negation of ‘every animal 
is white’ (for both are false): the proper negation is ‘every 
animal is not white’. Since it is clear that ‘it is not-white’ and ‘it 
is not white’ mean different things, and one is an affirmation, 
the other a denial, it is evident that the method of proving each 
cannot be the same, e.g. that whatever is an animal is not white 
or may not be white, and that it is true to call it not-white; for 
this means that it is not-white. But we may prove that it is true 
to call it white or not-white in the same way for both are proved 
constructively by means of the first figure. For the expression ‘it 
is true’ stands on a similar footing to ‘it is’. For the negation of 
‘it is true to call it white’ is not ‘it is true to call it not-white’ but 
‘it is not true to call it white’. If then it is to be true to say that 
whatever is a man is musical or is not-musical, we must 
assume that whatever is an animal either is musical or is not-
musical; and the proof has been made. That whatever is a man 
is not musical is proved destructively in the three ways 
mentioned. 


In general whenever A and B are such that they cannot belong 
at the same time to the same thing, and one of the two 
necessarily belongs to everything, and again C and D are related 
in the same way, and A follows C but the relation cannot be 
reversed, then D must follow B and the relation cannot be 
reversed. And A and D may belong to the same thing, but B and 
C cannot. First it is clear from the following consideration that D 
follows B. For since either C or D necessarily belongs to 
everything; and since C cannot belong to that to which B 
belongs, because it carries A along with it and A and B cannot 
belong to the same thing; it is clear that D must follow B. Again 
since C does not reciprocate with but A, but C or D belongs to 
everything, it is possible that A and D should belong to the same 
thing. But B and C cannot belong to the same thing, because A 
follows C; and so something impossible results. It is clear then 
that B does not reciprocate with D either, since it is possible that 
D and A should belong at the same time to the same thing. 

It results sometimes even in such an arrangement of terms that 
one is deceived through not apprehending the opposites rightly, 
one of which must belong to everything, e.g. we may reason 
that ‘if A and B cannot belong at the same time to the same 
thing, but it is necessary that one of them should belong to 
whatever the other does not belong to: and again C and D are 
related in the same way, and follows everything which C 
follows: it will result that B belongs necessarily to everything to 
which D belongs’: but this is false. ‘Assume that F stands for the 
negation of A and B, and again that H stands for the negation of 
C and D. It is necessary then that either A or F should belong to 
everything: for either the affirmation or the denial must belong. 
And again either C or H must belong to everything: for they are 
related as affirmation and denial. And ex hypothesi A belongs to 
everything ever thing to which C belongs. Therefore H belongs 
to everything to which F belongs. Again since either F or B 
belongs to everything, and similarly either H or D, and since H 


follows F, B must follow D: for we know this. If then A follows C, 
B must follow D’. But this is false: for as we proved the sequence 
is reversed in terms so constituted. The fallacy arises because 
perhaps it is not necessary that A or F should belong to 
everything, or that F or B should belong to everything: for F is 
not the denial of A. For not good is the negation of good: and 
not-good is not identical with ‘neither good nor not-good’. 
Similarly also with C and D. For two negations have been 
assumed in respect to one term. 

Book II 

We have already explained the number of the figures, the 
character and number of the premisses, when and how a 
syllogism is formed; further what we must look for when a 
refuting and establishing propositions, and how we should 
investigate a given problem in any branch of inquiry, also by 
what means we shall obtain principles appropriate to each 
subject. Since some syllogisms are universal, others particular, 
all the universal syllogisms give more than one result, and of 
particular syllogisms the affirmative yield more than one, the 
negative yield only the stated conclusion. For all propositions 
are convertible save only the particular negative: and the 
conclusion states one definite thing about another definite 
thing. Consequently all syllogisms save the particular negative 


yield more than one conclusion, e.g. if A has been proved to to 
all or to some B, then B must belong to some A: and if A has 
been proved to belong to no B, then B belongs to no A. This is a 
different conclusion from the former. But if A does not belong to 
some B, it is not necessary that B should not belong to some A: 
for it may possibly belong to all A. 

This then is the reason common to all syllogisms whether 
universal or particular. But it is possible to give another reason 
concerning those which are universal. For all the things that are 
subordinate to the middle term or to the conclusion may be 
proved by the same syllogism, if the former are placed in the 
middle, the latter in the conclusion; e.g. if the conclusion AB is 
proved through C, whatever is subordinate to B or C must accept 
the predicate A: for if D is included in B as in a whole, and B is 
included in A, then D will be included in A. Again if E is included 
in C as in a whole, and C is included in A, then E will be 
included in A. Similarly if the syllogism is negative. In the 
second figure it will be possible to infer only that which is 
subordinate to the conclusion, e.g. if A belongs to no B and to all 
C; we conclude that B belongs to no C. If then D is subordinate 
to C, clearly B does not belong to it. But that B does not belong 
to what is subordinate to A is not clear by means of the 
syllogism. And yet B does not belong to E, if E is subordinate to 

A. But while it has been proved through the syllogism that B 
belongs to no C, it has been assumed without proof that B does 
not belong to A, consequently it does not result through the 
syllogism that B does not belong to E. 
But in particular syllogisms there will be no necessity of 
inferring what is subordinate to the conclusion (for a syllogism 
does not result when this premiss is particular), but whatever is 
subordinate to the middle term may be inferred, not however 
through the syllogism, e.g. if A belongs to all B and B to some C. 
Nothing can be inferred about that which is subordinate to C; 


something can be inferred about that which is subordinate to B, 
but not through the preceding syllogism. Similarly in the other 
figures. That which is subordinate to the conclusion cannot be 
proved; the other subordinate can be proved, only not through 
the syllogism, just as in the universal syllogisms what is 
subordinate to the middle term is proved (as we saw) from a 
premiss which is not demonstrated: consequently either a 
conclusion is not possible in the case of universal syllogisms or 
else it is possible also in the case of particular syllogisms. 

It is possible for the premisses of the syllogism to be true, or to 
be false, or to be the one true, the other false. The conclusion is 
either true or false necessarily. From true premisses it is not 
possible to draw a false conclusion, but a true conclusion may 
be drawn from false premisses, true however only in respect to 
the fact, not to the reason. The reason cannot be established 
from false premisses: why this is so will be explained in the 
sequel. 

First then that it is not possible to draw a false conclusion from 
true premisses, is made clear by this consideration. If it is 
necessary that B should be when A is, it is necessary that A 
should not be when B is not. If then A is true, B must be true: 
otherwise it will turn out that the same thing both is and is not 
at the same time. But this is impossible. Let it not, because A is 
laid down as a single term, be supposed that it is possible, when 
a single fact is given, that something should necessarily result. 
For that is not possible. For what results necessarily is the 
conclusion, and the means by which this comes about are at the 
least three terms, and two relations of subject and predicate or 


premisses. If then it is true that A belongs to all that to which B 
belongs, and that B belongs to all that to which C belongs, it is 
necessary that A should belong to all that to which C belongs, 
and this cannot be false: for then the same thing will belong 
and not belong at the same time. So A is posited as one thing, 
being two premisses taken together. The same holds good of 
negative syllogisms: it is not possible to prove a false conclusion 
from true premisses. 

But from what is false a true conclusion may be drawn, whether 
both the premisses are false or only one, provided that this is 
not either of the premisses indifferently, if it is taken as wholly 
false: but if the premiss is not taken as wholly false, it does not 
matter which of the two is false. (1) Let A belong to the whole of 
C, but to none of the Bs, neither let B belong to C. This is 
possible, e.g. animal belongs to no stone, nor stone to any man. 
If then A is taken to belong to all B and B to all C, A will belong 
to all C; consequently though both the premisses are false the 
conclusion is true: for every man is an animal. Similarly with 
the negative. For it is possible that neither A nor B should 
belong to any C, although A belongs to all B, e.g. if the same 
terms are taken and man is put as middle: for neither animal 
nor man belongs to any stone, but animal belongs to every man. 
Consequently if one term is taken to belong to none of that to 
which it does belong, and the other term is taken to belong to 
all of that to which it does not belong, though both the 
premisses are false the conclusion will be true. (2) A similar 
proof may be given if each premiss is partially false. 

(3) But if one only of the premisses is false, when the first 
premiss is wholly false, e.g. AB, the conclusion will not be true, 
but if the premiss BC is wholly false, a true conclusion will be 
possible. I mean by ‘wholly false’ the contrary of the truth, e.g. if 
what belongs to none is assumed to belong to all, or if what 
belongs to all is assumed to belong to none. Let A belong to no 

B, and B to all C. If then the premiss BC which I take is true, and 
the premiss AB is wholly false, viz. that A belongs to all B, it is 
impossible that the conclusion should be true: for A belonged to 
none of the Cs, since A belonged to nothing to which B 
belonged, and B belonged to all C. Similarly there cannot be a 
true conclusion if A belongs to all B, and B to all C, but while the 
true premiss BC is assumed, the wholly false premiss AB is also 
assumed, viz. that A belongs to nothing to which B belongs: 
here the conclusion must be false. For A will belong to all C, 
since A belongs to everything to which B belongs, and B to all C. 
It is clear then that when the first premiss is wholly false, 
whether affirmative or negative, and the other premiss is true, 
the conclusion cannot be true. 

(4) But if the premiss is not wholly false, a true conclusion is 
possible. For if A belongs to all C and to some B, and if B belongs 
to all C, e.g. animal to every swan and to some white thing, and 
white to every swan, then if we take as premisses that A 
belongs to all B, and B to all C, A will belong to all C truly: for 
every swan is an animal. Similarly if the statement AB is 
negative. For it is possible that A should belong to some B and to 
no C, and that B should belong to all C, e.g. animal to some 
white thing, but to no snow, and white to all snow. If then one 
should assume that A belongs to no B, and B to all C, then will 
belong to no C. 
(5) But if the premiss AB, which is assumed, is wholly true, and 
the premiss BC is wholly false, a true syllogism will be possible: 
for nothing prevents A belonging to all B and to all C, though B 
belongs to no C, e.g. these being species of the same genus 
which are not subordinate one to the other: for animal belongs 
both to horse and to man, but horse to no man. If then it is 
assumed that A belongs to all B and B to all C, the conclusion 
will be true, although the premiss BC is wholly false. Similarly if 
the premiss AB is negative. For it is possible that A should 

belong neither to any B nor to any C, and that B should not 
belong to any C, e.g. a genus to species of another genus: for 
animal belongs neither to music nor to the art of healing, nor 
does music belong to the art of healing. If then it is assumed 
that A belongs to no B, and B to all C, the conclusion will be true. 

(6) And if the premiss BC is not wholly false but in part only, 
even so the conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A 
belonging to the whole of B and of C, while B belongs to some C, 
e.g. a genus to its species and difference: for animal belongs to 
every man and to every footed thing, and man to some footed 
things though not to all. If then it is assumed that A belongs to 
all B, and B to all C, A will belong to all C: and this ex hypothesi 
is true. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative. For it is possible 
that A should neither belong to any B nor to any C, though B 
belongs to some C, e.g. a genus to the species of another genus 
and its difference: for animal neither belongs to any wisdom 
nor to any instance of ‘speculative’, but wisdom belongs to 
some instance of ‘speculative’. If then it should be assumed that 
A belongs to no B, and B to all C, will belong to no C: and this ex 
hypothesi is true. 
In particular syllogisms it is possible when the first premiss is 
wholly false, and the other true, that the conclusion should be 
true; also when the first premiss is false in part, and the other 
true; and when the first is true, and the particular is false; and 
when both are false. (7) For nothing prevents A belonging to no 
B, but to some C, and B to some C, e.g. animal belongs to no 
snow, but to some white thing, and snow to some white thing. If 
then snow is taken as middle, and animal as first term, and it is 
assumed that A belongs to the whole of B, and B to some C, then 
the premiss BC is wholly false, the premiss BC true, and the 
conclusion true. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative: for it is 
possible that A should belong to the whole of B, but not to some 
C, although B belongs to some C, e.g. animal belongs to every 


man, but does not follow some white, but man belongs to some 
white; consequently if man be taken as middle term and it is 
assumed that A belongs to no B but B belongs to some C, the 
conclusion will be true although the premiss AB is wholly false. 
(If the premiss AB is false in part, the conclusion may be true. 
For nothing prevents A belonging both to B and to some C, and 
B belonging to some C, e.g. animal to something beautiful and 
to something great, and beautiful belonging to something great. 
If then A is assumed to belong to all B, and B to some C, the a 
premiss AB will be partially false, the premiss BC will be true, 
and the conclusion true. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative. 
For the same terms will serve, and in the same positions, to 
prove the point. 

(9) Again if the premiss AB is true, and the premiss BC is false, 
the conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A belonging to 
the whole of B and to some C, while B belongs to no C, e.g. 
animal to every swan and to some black things, though swan 
belongs to no black thing. Consequently if it should be assumed 
that A belongs to all B, and B to some C, the conclusion will be 
true, although the statement BC is false. Similarly if the premiss 
AB is negative. For it is possible that A should belong to no B, 
and not to some C, while B belongs to no C, e.g. a genus to the 
species of another genus and to the accident of its own species: 
for animal belongs to no number and not to some white things, 
and number belongs to nothing white. If then number is taken 
as middle, and it is assumed that A belongs to no B, and B to 
some C, then A will not belong to some C, which ex hypothesi is 
true. And the premiss AB is true, the premiss BC false. 
(10) Also if the premiss AB is partially false, and the premiss BC 
is false too, the conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A 
belonging to some B and to some C, though B belongs to no C, 
e.g. if B is the contrary of C, and both are accidents of the same 
genus: for animal belongs to some white things and to some 

black things, but white belongs to no black thing. If then it is 
assumed that A belongs to all B, and B to some C, the conclusion 
will be true. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative: for the same 
terms arranged in the same way will serve for the proof. 

(11) Also though both premisses are false the conclusion may be 
true. For it is possible that A may belong to no B and to some C, 
while B belongs to no C, e.g. a genus in relation to the species of 
another genus, and to the accident of its own species: for 
animal belongs to no number, but to some white things, and 
number to nothing white. If then it is assumed that A belongs to 
all B and B to some C, the conclusion will be true, though both 
premisses are false. Similarly also if the premiss AB is negative. 
For nothing prevents A belonging to the whole of B, and not to 
some C, while B belongs to no C, e.g. animal belongs to every 
swan, and not to some black things, and swan belongs to 
nothing black. Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs to 
no B, and B to some C, then A does not belong to some C. The 
conclusion then is true, but the premisses arc false. 
In the middle figure it is possible in every way to reach a true 
conclusion through false premisses, whether the syllogisms are 
universal or particular, viz. when both premisses are wholly 
false; when each is partially false; when one is true, the other 
wholly false (it does not matter which of the two premisses is 
false); if both premisses are partially false; if one is quite true, 
the other partially false; if one is wholly false, the other partially 
true. For (1) if A belongs to no B and to all C, e.g. animal to no 
stone and to every horse, then if the premisses are stated 
contrariwise and it is assumed that A belongs to all B and to no 


C, though the premisses are wholly false they will yield a true 
conclusion. Similarly if A belongs to all B and to no C: for we 
shall have the same syllogism. 

(2) Again if one premiss is wholly false, the other wholly true: 
for nothing prevents A belonging to all B and to all C, though B 
belongs to no C, e.g. a genus to its co-ordinate species. For 
animal belongs to every horse and man, and no man is a horse. 
If then it is assumed that animal belongs to all of the one, and 
none of the other, the one premiss will be wholly false, the 
other wholly true, and the conclusion will be true whichever 
term the negative statement concerns. 
(3) Also if one premiss is partially false, the other wholly true. 
For it is possible that A should belong to some B and to all C, 
though B belongs to no C, e.g. animal to some white things and 
to every raven, though white belongs to no raven. If then it is 
assumed that A belongs to no B, but to the whole of C, the 
premiss AB is partially false, the premiss AC wholly true, and 
the conclusion true. Similarly if the negative statement is 
transposed: the proof can be made by means of the same terms. 
Also if the affirmative premiss is partially false, the negative 
wholly true, a true conclusion is possible. For nothing prevents 
A belonging to some B, but not to C as a whole, while B belongs 
to no C, e.g. animal belongs to some white things, but to no 
pitch, and white belongs to no pitch. Consequently if it is 
assumed that A belongs to the whole of B, but to no C, the 
premiss AB is partially false, the premiss AC is wholly true, and 
the conclusion is true. 
(4) And if both the premisses are partially false, the conclusion 
may be true. For it is possible that A should belong to some B 
and to some C, and B to no C, e.g. animal to some white things 
and to some black things, though white belongs to nothing 
black. If then it is assumed that A belongs to all B and to no C, 

both premisses are partially false, but the conclusion is true. 
Similarly, if the negative premiss is transposed, the proof can be 
made by means of the same terms. 

It is clear also that our thesis holds in particular syllogisms. For 

(5) nothing prevents A belonging to all B and to some C, though 
B does not belong to some C, e.g. animal to every man and to 
some white things, though man will not belong to some white 
things. If then it is stated that A belongs to no B and to some C, 
the universal premiss is wholly false, the particular premiss is 
true, and the conclusion is true. Similarly if the premiss AB is 
affirmative: for it is possible that A should belong to no B, and 
not to some C, though B does not belong to some C, e.g. animal 
belongs to nothing lifeless, and does not belong to some white 
things, and lifeless will not belong to some white things. If then 
it is stated that A belongs to all B and not to some C, the 
premiss AB which is universal is wholly false, the premiss AC is 
true, and the conclusion is true. Also a true conclusion is 
possible when the universal premiss is true, and the particular 
is false. For nothing prevents A following neither B nor C at all, 
while B does not belong to some C, e.g. animal belongs to no 
number nor to anything lifeless, and number does not follow 
some lifeless things. If then it is stated that A belongs to no B 
and to some C, the conclusion will be true, and the universal 
premiss true, but the particular false. Similarly if the premiss 
which is stated universally is affirmative. For it is possible that 
should A belong both to B and to C as wholes, though B does not 
follow some C, e.g. a genus in relation to its species and 
difference: for animal follows every man and footed things as a 
whole, but man does not follow every footed thing. 
Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs to the whole of B, 
but does not belong to some C, the universal premiss is true, the 
particular false, and the conclusion true. 

(6) It is clear too that though both premisses are false they may 
yield a true conclusion, since it is possible that A should belong 
both to B and to C as wholes, though B does not follow some C. 
For if it is assumed that A belongs to no B and to some C, the 
premisses are both false, but the conclusion is true. Similarly if 
the universal premiss is affirmative and the particular negative. 
For it is possible that A should follow no B and all C, though B 
does not belong to some C, e.g. animal follows no science but 
every man, though science does not follow every man. If then A 
is assumed to belong to the whole of B, and not to follow some 
C, the premisses are false but the conclusion is true. 
In the last figure a true conclusion may come through what is 
false, alike when both premisses are wholly false, when each is 
partly false, when one premiss is wholly true, the other false, 
when one premiss is partly false, the other wholly true, and vice 
versa, and in every other way in which it is possible to alter the 
premisses. For (1) nothing prevents neither A nor B from 
belonging to any C, while A belongs to some B, e.g. neither man 
nor footed follows anything lifeless, though man belongs to 
some footed things. If then it is assumed that A and B belong to 
all C, the premisses will be wholly false, but the conclusion true. 
Similarly if one premiss is negative, the other affirmative. For it 
is possible that B should belong to no C, but A to all C, and that 
should not belong to some B, e.g. black belongs to no swan, 
animal to every swan, and animal not to everything black. 
Consequently if it is assumed that B belongs to all C, and A to 
no C, A will not belong to some B: and the conclusion is true, 
though the premisses are false. 


(2) Also if each premiss is partly false, the conclusion may be 
true. For nothing prevents both A and B from belonging to some 
C while A belongs to some B, e.g. white and beautiful belong to 
some animals, and white to some beautiful things. If then it is 
stated that A and B belong to all C, the premisses are partially 
false, but the conclusion is true. Similarly if the premiss AC is 
stated as negative. For nothing prevents A from not belonging, 
and B from belonging, to some C, while A does not belong to all 
B, e.g. white does not belong to some animals, beautiful belongs 
to some animals, and white does not belong to everything 
beautiful. Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs to no C, 
and B to all C, both premisses are partly false, but the 
conclusion is true. 
(3) Similarly if one of the premisses assumed is wholly false, the 
other wholly true. For it is possible that both A and B should 
follow all C, though A does not belong to some B, e.g. animal 
and white follow every swan, though animal does not belong to 
everything white. Taking these then as terms, if one assumes 
that B belongs to the whole of C, but A does not belong to C at 
all, the premiss BC will be wholly true, the premiss AC wholly 
false, and the conclusion true. Similarly if the statement BC is 
false, the statement AC true, the conclusion may be true. The 
same terms will serve for the proof. Also if both the premisses 
assumed are affirmative, the conclusion may be true. For 
nothing prevents B from following all C, and A from not 
belonging to C at all, though A belongs to some B, e.g. animal 
belongs to every swan, black to no swan, and black to some 
animals. Consequently if it is assumed that A and B belong to 
every C, the premiss BC is wholly true, the premiss AC is wholly 
false, and the conclusion is true. Similarly if the premiss AC 
which is assumed is true: the proof can be made through the 
same terms. 

(4) Again if one premiss is wholly true, the other partly false, the 
conclusion may be true. For it is possible that B should belong to 
all C, and A to some C, while A belongs to some B, e.g. biped 
belongs to every man, beautiful not to every man, and beautiful 
to some bipeds. If then it is assumed that both A and B belong 
to the whole of C, the premiss BC is wholly true, the premiss AC 
partly false, the conclusion true. Similarly if of the premisses 
assumed AC is true and BC partly false, a true conclusion is 
possible: this can be proved, if the same terms as before are 
transposed. Also the conclusion may be true if one premiss is 
negative, the other affirmative. For since it is possible that B 
should belong to the whole of C, and A to some C, and, when 
they are so, that A should not belong to all B, therefore it is 
assumed that B belongs to the whole of C, and A to no C, the 
negative premiss is partly false, the other premiss wholly true, 
and the conclusion is true. Again since it has been proved that if 
A belongs to no C and B to some C, it is possible that A should 
not belong to some C, it is clear that if the premiss AC is wholly 
true, and the premiss BC partly false, it is possible that the 
conclusion should be true. For if it is assumed that A belongs to 
no C, and B to all C, the premiss AC is wholly true, and the 
premiss BC is partly false. 
(5) It is clear also in the case of particular syllogisms that a true 
conclusion may come through what is false, in every possible 
way. For the same terms must be taken as have been taken 
when the premisses are universal, positive terms in positive 
syllogisms, negative terms in negative. For it makes no 
difference to the setting out of the terms, whether one assumes 
that what belongs to none belongs to all or that what belongs to 
some belongs to all. The same applies to negative statements. 
It is clear then that if the conclusion is false, the premisses of 
the argument must be false, either all or some of them; but 
when the conclusion is true, it is not necessary that the 


premisses should be true, either one or all, yet it is possible, 
though no part of the syllogism is true, that the conclusion may 
none the less be true; but it is not necessitated. The reason is 
that when two things are so related to one another, that if the 
one is, the other necessarily is, then if the latter is not, the 
former will not be either, but if the latter is, it is not necessary 
that the former should be. But it is impossible that the same 
thing should be necessitated by the being and by the not-being 
of the same thing. I mean, for example, that it is impossible that 
B should necessarily be great since A is white and that B should 
necessarily be great since A is not white. For whenever since 
this, A, is white it is necessary that that, B, should be great, and 
since B is great that C should not be white, then it is necessary 
if is white that C should not be white. And whenever it is 
necessary, since one of two things is, that the other should be, it 
is necessary, if the latter is not, that the former (viz. A) should 
not be. If then B is not great A cannot be white. But if, when A is 
not white, it is necessary that B should be great, it necessarily 
results that if B is not great, B itself is great. (But this is 
impossible.) For if B is not great, A will necessarily not be white. 
If then when this is not white B must be great, it results that if B 
is not great, it is great, just as if it were proved through three 
terms. 

Circular and reciprocal proof means proof by means of the 
conclusion, i.e. by converting one of the premisses simply and 
inferring the premiss which was assumed in the original 
syllogism: e.g. suppose it has been necessary to prove that A 
belongs to all C, and it has been proved through B; suppose that 
A should now be proved to belong to B by assuming that A 


belongs to C, and C to B – so A belongs to B: but in the first 
syllogism the converse was assumed, viz. that B belongs to C. Or 
suppose it is necessary to prove that B belongs to C, and A is 
assumed to belong to C, which was the conclusion of the first 
syllogism, and B to belong to A but the converse was assumed 
in the earlier syllogism, viz. that A belongs to B. In no other way 
is reciprocal proof possible. If another term is taken as middle, 
the proof is not circular: for neither of the propositions assumed 
is the same as before: if one of the accepted terms is taken as 
middle, only one of the premisses of the first syllogism can be 
assumed in the second: for if both of them are taken the same 
conclusion as before will result: but it must be different. If the 
terms are not convertible, one of the premisses from which the 
syllogism results must be undemonstrated: for it is not possible 
to demonstrate through these terms that the third belongs to 
the middle or the middle to the first. If the terms are 
convertible, it is possible to demonstrate everything reciprocally, 

e.g. if A and B and C are convertible with one another. Suppose 
the proposition AC has been demonstrated through B as middle 
term, and again the proposition AB through the conclusion and 
the premiss BC converted, and similarly the proposition BC 
through the conclusion and the premiss AB converted. But it is 
necessary to prove both the premiss CB, and the premiss BA: for 
we have used these alone without demonstrating them. If then 
it is assumed that B belongs to all C, and C to all A, we shall 
have a syllogism relating B to A. Again if it is assumed that C 
belongs to all A, and A to all B, C must belong to all B. In both 
these syllogisms the premiss CA has been assumed without 
being demonstrated: the other premisses had ex hypothesi been 
proved. Consequently if we succeed in demonstrating this 
premiss, all the premisses will have been proved reciprocally. If 
then it is assumed that C belongs to all B, and B to all A, both 
the premisses assumed have been proved, and C must belong to 
A. It is clear then that only if the terms are convertible is 

circular and reciprocal demonstration possible (if the terms are 
not convertible, the matter stands as we said above). But it turns 
out in these also that we use for the demonstration the very 
thing that is being proved: for C is proved of B, and B of by 
assuming that C is said of and C is proved of A through these 
premisses, so that we use the conclusion for the demonstration. 

In negative syllogisms reciprocal proof is as follows. Let B 
belong to all C, and A to none of the Bs: we conclude that A 
belongs to none of the Cs. If again it is necessary to prove that A 
belongs to none of the Bs (which was previously assumed) A 
must belong to no C, and C to all B: thus the previous premiss is 
reversed. If it is necessary to prove that B belongs to C, the 
proposition AB must no longer be converted as before: for the 
premiss ‘B belongs to no A’ is identical with the premiss ‘A 
belongs to no B’. But we must assume that B belongs to all of 
that to none of which longs. Let A belong to none of the Cs 
(which was the previous conclusion) and assume that B belongs 
to all of that to none of which A belongs. It is necessary then 
that B should belong to all C. Consequently each of the three 
propositions has been made a conclusion, and this is circular 
demonstration, to assume the conclusion and the converse of 
one of the premisses, and deduce the remaining premiss. 

In particular syllogisms it is not possible to demonstrate the 
universal premiss through the other propositions, but the 
particular premiss can be demonstrated. Clearly it is impossible 
to demonstrate the universal premiss: for what is universal is 
proved through propositions which are universal, but the 
conclusion is not universal, and the proof must start from the 
conclusion and the other premiss. Further a syllogism cannot 
be made at all if the other premiss is converted: for the result is 
that both premisses are particular. But the particular premiss 
may be proved. Suppose that A has been proved of some C 
through B. If then it is assumed that B belongs to all A and the 


conclusion is retained, B will belong to some C: for we obtain 
the first figure and A is middle. But if the syllogism is negative, 
it is not possible to prove the universal premiss, for the reason 
given above. But it is possible to prove the particular premiss, if 
the proposition AB is converted as in the universal syllogism, i.e 
‘B belongs to some of that to some of which A does not belong’: 
otherwise no syllogism results because the particular premiss is 
negative. 

In the second figure it is not possible to prove an affirmative 
proposition in this way, but a negative proposition may be 
proved. An affirmative proposition is not proved because both 
premisses of the new syllogism are not affirmative (for the 
conclusion is negative) but an affirmative proposition is (as we 
saw) proved from premisses which are both affirmative. The 
negative is proved as follows. Let A belong to all B, and to no C: 
we conclude that B belongs to no C. If then it is assumed that B 
belongs to all A, it is necessary that A should belong to no C: for 
we get the second figure, with B as middle. But if the premiss AB 
was negative, and the other affirmative, we shall have the first 
figure. For C belongs to all A and B to no C, consequently B 
belongs to no A: neither then does A belong to B. Through the 
conclusion, therefore, and one premiss, we get no syllogism, but 
if another premiss is assumed in addition, a syllogism will be 
possible. But if the syllogism not universal, the universal 
premiss cannot be proved, for the same reason as we gave 
above, but the particular premiss can be proved whenever the 
universal statement is affirmative. Let A belong to all B, and not 
to all C: the conclusion is BC. If then it is assumed that B 
belongs to all A, but not to all C, A will not belong to some C, B 


being middle. But if the universal premiss is negative, the 
premiss AC will not be demonstrated by the conversion of AB: 
for it turns out that either both or one of the premisses is 
negative; consequently a syllogism will not be possible. But the 
proof will proceed as in the universal syllogisms, if it is 
assumed that A belongs to some of that to some of which B 
does not belong. 

In the third figure, when both premisses are taken universally, it 
is not possible to prove them reciprocally: for that which is 
universal is proved through statements which are universal, but 
the conclusion in this figure is always particular, so that it is 
clear that it is not possible at all to prove through this figure the 
universal premiss. But if one premiss is universal, the other 
particular, proof of the latter will sometimes be possible, 
sometimes not. When both the premisses assumed are 
affirmative, and the universal concerns the minor extreme, 
proof will be possible, but when it concerns the other extreme, 
impossible. Let A belong to all C and B to some C: the conclusion 
is the statement AB. If then it is assumed that C belongs to all A, 
it has been proved that C belongs to some B, but that B belongs 
to some C has not been proved. And yet it is necessary, if C 
belongs to some B, that B should belong to some C. But it is not 
the same that this should belong to that, and that to this: but 
we must assume besides that if this belongs to some of that, 
that belongs to some of this. But if this is assumed the 
syllogism no longer results from the conclusion and the other 
premiss. But if B belongs to all C, and A to some C, it will be 
possible to prove the proposition AC, when it is assumed that C 
belongs to all B, and A to some B. For if C belongs to all B and A 


to some B, it is necessary that A should belong to some C, B 
being middle. And whenever one premiss is affirmative the 
other negative, and the affirmative is universal, the other 
premiss can be proved. Let B belong to all C, and A not to some 

C: the conclusion is that A does not belong to some B. If then it 
is assumed further that C belongs to all B, it is necessary that A 
should not belong to some C, B being middle. But when the 
negative premiss is universal, the other premiss is not except as 
before, viz. if it is assumed that that belongs to some of that, to 
some of which this does not belong, e.g. if A belongs to no C, 
and B to some C: the conclusion is that A does not belong to 
some B. If then it is assumed that C belongs to some of that to 
some of which does not belong, it is necessary that C should 
belong to some of the Bs. In no other way is it possible by 
converting the universal premiss to prove the other: for in no 
other way can a syllogism be formed. 
It is clear then that in the first figure reciprocal proof is made 
both through the third and through the first figure – if the 
conclusion is affirmative through the first; if the conclusion is 
negative through the last. For it is assumed that that belongs to 
all of that to none of which this belongs. In the middle figure, 
when the syllogism is universal, proof is possible through the 
second figure and through the first, but when particular 
through the second and the last. In the third figure all proofs 
are made through itself. It is clear also that in the third figure 
and in the middle figure those syllogisms which are not made 
through those figures themselves either are not of the nature of 
circular proof or are imperfect. 


To convert a syllogism means to alter the conclusion and make 
another syllogism to prove that either the extreme cannot 
belong to the middle or the middle to the last term. For it is 
necessary, if the conclusion has been changed into its opposite 
and one of the premisses stands, that the other premiss should 
be destroyed. For if it should stand, the conclusion also must 
stand. It makes a difference whether the conclusion is 
converted into its contradictory or into its contrary. For the 
same syllogism does not result whichever form the conversion 
takes. This will be made clear by the sequel. By contradictory 
opposition I mean the opposition of ‘to all’ to ‘not to all’, and of 
‘to some’ to ‘to none’; by contrary opposition I mean the 
opposition of ‘to all’ to ‘to none’, and of ‘to some’ to ‘not to 
some’. Suppose that A been proved of C, through B as middle 
term. If then it should be assumed that A belongs to no C, but to 
all B, B will belong to no C. And if A belongs to no C, and B to all 
C, A will belong, not to no B at all, but not to all B. For (as we 
saw) the universal is not proved through the last figure. In a 
word it is not possible to refute universally by conversion the 
premiss which concerns the major extreme: for the refutation 
always proceeds through the third since it is necessary to take 
both premisses in reference to the minor extreme. Similarly if 
the syllogism is negative. Suppose it has been proved that A 
belongs to no C through B. Then if it is assumed that A belongs 
to all C, and to no B, B will belong to none of the Cs. And if A and 
B belong to all C, A will belong to some B: but in the original 
premiss it belonged to no B. 

If the conclusion is converted into its contradictory, the 
syllogisms will be contradictory and not universal. For one 
premiss is particular, so that the conclusion also will be 
particular. Let the syllogism be affirmative, and let it be 
converted as stated. Then if A belongs not to all C, but to all B, B 


will belong not to all C. And if A belongs not to all C, but B 
belongs to all C, A will belong not to all B. Similarly if the 
syllogism is negative. For if A belongs to some C, and to no B, B 
will belong, not to no C at all, but – not to some C. And if A 
belongs to some C, and B to all C, as was originally assumed, A 
will belong to some B. 

In particular syllogisms when the conclusion is converted into 
its contradictory, both premisses may be refuted, but when it is 
converted into its contrary, neither. For the result is no longer, 
as in the universal syllogisms, refutation in which the 
conclusion reached by O, conversion lacks universality, but no 
refutation at all. Suppose that A has been proved of some C. If 
then it is assumed that A belongs to no C, and B to some C, A 
will not belong to some B: and if A belongs to no C, but to all B, B 
will belong to no C. Thus both premisses are refuted. But neither 
can be refuted if the conclusion is converted into its contrary. 
For if A does not belong to some C, but to all B, then B will not 
belong to some C. But the original premiss is not yet refuted: for 
it is possible that B should belong to some C, and should not 
belong to some C. The universal premiss AB cannot be affected 
by a syllogism at all: for if A does not belong to some of the Cs, 
but B belongs to some of the Cs, neither of the premisses is 
universal. Similarly if the syllogism is negative: for if it should 
be assumed that A belongs to all C, both premisses are refuted: 
but if the assumption is that A belongs to some C, neither 
premiss is refuted. The proof is the same as before. 

In the second figure it is not possible to refute the premiss 
which concerns the major extreme by establishing something 



contrary to it, whichever form the conversion of the conclusion 
may take. For the conclusion of the refutation will always be in 
the third figure, and in this figure (as we saw) there is no 
universal syllogism. The other premiss can be refuted in a 
manner similar to the conversion: I mean, if the conclusion of 
the first syllogism is converted into its contrary, the conclusion 
of the refutation will be the contrary of the minor premiss of 
the first, if into its contradictory, the contradictory. Let A belong 
to all B and to no C: conclusion BC. If then it is assumed that B 
belongs to all C, and the proposition AB stands, A will belong to 
all C, since the first figure is produced. If B belongs to all C, and 
A to no C, then A belongs not to all B: the figure is the last. But if 
the conclusion BC is converted into its contradictory, the 
premiss AB will be refuted as before, the premiss, AC by its 
contradictory. For if B belongs to some C, and A to no C, then A 
will not belong to some B. Again if B belongs to some C, and A to 
all B, A will belong to some C, so that the syllogism results in 
the contradictory of the minor premiss. A similar proof can be 
given if the premisses are transposed in respect of their quality. 

If the syllogism is particular, when the conclusion is converted 
into its contrary neither premiss can be refuted, as also 
happened in the first figure,’ if the conclusion is converted into 
its contradictory, both premisses can be refuted. Suppose that A 
belongs to no B, and to some C: the conclusion is BC. If then it is 
assumed that B belongs to some C, and the statement AB 
stands, the conclusion will be that A does not belong to some C. 
But the original statement has not been refuted: for it is 
possible that A should belong to some C and also not to some C. 
Again if B belongs to some C and A to some C, no syllogism will 
be possible: for neither of the premisses taken is universal. 
Consequently the proposition AB is not refuted. But if the 
conclusion is converted into its contradictory, both premisses 
can be refuted. For if B belongs to all C, and A to no B, A will 
belong to no C: but it was assumed to belong to some C. Again if 


B belongs to all C and A to some C, A will belong to some B. The 
same proof can be given if the universal statement is 
affirmative. 

In the third figure when the conclusion is converted into its 
contrary, neither of the premisses can be refuted in any of the 
syllogisms, but when the conclusion is converted into its 
contradictory, both premisses may be refuted and in all the 
moods. Suppose it has been proved that A belongs to some B, C 
being taken as middle, and the premisses being universal. If 
then it is assumed that A does not belong to some B, but B 
belongs to all C, no syllogism is formed about A and C. Nor if A 
does not belong to some B, but belongs to all C, will a syllogism 
be possible about B and C. A similar proof can be given if the 
premisses are not universal. For either both premisses arrived at 
by the conversion must be particular, or the universal premiss 
must refer to the minor extreme. But we found that no 
syllogism is possible thus either in the first or in the middle 
figure. But if the conclusion is converted into its contradictory, 
both the premisses can be refuted. For if A belongs to no B, and 
B to all C, then A belongs to no C: again if A belongs to no B, and 
to all C, B belongs to no C. And similarly if one of the premisses 
is not universal. For if A belongs to no B, and B to some C, A will 
not belong to some C: if A belongs to no B, and to C, B will 
belong to no C. 

Similarly if the original syllogism is negative. Suppose it has 
been proved that A does not belong to some B, BC being 
affirmative, AC being negative: for it was thus that, as we saw, a 
syllogism could be made. Whenever then the contrary of the 


conclusion is assumed a syllogism will not be possible. For if A 
belongs to some B, and B to all C, no syllogism is possible (as we 
saw) about A and C. Nor, if A belongs to some B, and to no C, 
was a syllogism possible concerning B and C. Therefore the 
premisses are not refuted. But when the contradictory of the 
conclusion is assumed, they are refuted. For if A belongs to all B, 
and B to C, A belongs to all C: but A was supposed originally to 
belong to no C. Again if A belongs to all B, and to no C, then B 
belongs to no C: but it was supposed to belong to all C. A similar 
proof is possible if the premisses are not universal. For AC 
becomes universal and negative, the other premiss particular 
and affirmative. If then A belongs to all B, and B to some C, it 
results that A belongs to some C: but it was supposed to belong 
to no C. Again if A belongs to all B, and to no C, then B belongs 
to no C: but it was assumed to belong to some C. If A belongs to 
some B and B to some C, no syllogism results: nor yet if A 
belongs to some B, and to no C. Thus in one way the premisses 
are refuted, in the other way they are not. 

From what has been said it is clear how a syllogism results in 
each figure when the conclusion is converted; when a result 
contrary to the premiss, and when a result contradictory to the 
premiss, is obtained. It is clear that in the first figure the 
syllogisms are formed through the middle and the last figures, 
and the premiss which concerns the minor extreme is alway 
refuted through the middle figure, the premiss which concerns 
the major through the last figure. In the second figure 
syllogisms proceed through the first and the last figures, and 
the premiss which concerns the minor extreme is always 
refuted through the first figure, the premiss which concerns the 
major extreme through the last. In the third figure the 
refutation proceeds through the first and the middle figures; the 
premiss which concerns the major is always refuted through 
the first figure, the premiss which concerns the minor through 
the middle figure. 


It is clear then what conversion is, how it is effected in each 
figure, and what syllogism results. The syllogism per 
impossibile is proved when the contradictory of the conclusion 
stated and another premiss is assumed; it can be made in all 
the figures. For it resembles conversion, differing only in this: 
conversion takes place after a syllogism has been formed and 
both the premisses have been taken, but a reduction to the 
impossible takes place not because the contradictory has been 
agreed to already, but because it is clear that it is true. The 
terms are alike in both, and the premisses of both are taken in 
the same way. For example if A belongs to all B, C being middle, 
then if it is supposed that A does not belong to all B or belongs 
to no B, but to all C (which was admitted to be true), it follows 
that C belongs to no B or not to all B. But this is impossible: 
consequently the supposition is false: its contradictory then is 
true. Similarly in the other figures: for whatever moods admit of 
conversion admit also of the reduction per impossibile. 

All the problems can be proved per impossibile in all the figures, 
excepting the universal affirmative, which is proved in the 
middle and third figures, but not in the first. Suppose that A 
belongs not to all B, or to no B, and take besides another 
premiss concerning either of the terms, viz. that C belongs to all 
A, or that B belongs to all D; thus we get the first figure. If then 
it is supposed that A does not belong to all B, no syllogism 
results whichever term the assumed premiss concerns; but if it 
is supposed that A belongs to no B, when the premiss BD is 
assumed as well we shall prove syllogistically what is false, but 
not the problem proposed. For if A belongs to no B, and B 
belongs to all D, A belongs to no D. Let this be impossible: it is 


false then A belongs to no B. But the universal affirmative is not 
necessarily true if the universal negative is false. But if the 
premiss CA is assumed as well, no syllogism results, nor does it 
do so when it is supposed that A does not belong to all B. 
Consequently it is clear that the universal affirmative cannot be 
proved in the first figure per impossibile. 

But the particular affirmative and the universal and particular 
negatives can all be proved. Suppose that A belongs to no B, and 
let it have been assumed that B belongs to all or to some C. 
Then it is necessary that A should belong to no C or not to all C. 
But this is impossible (for let it be true and clear that A belongs 
to all C): consequently if this is false, it is necessary that A 
should belong to some B. But if the other premiss assumed 
relates to A, no syllogism will be possible. Nor can a conclusion 
be drawn when the contrary of the conclusion is supposed, e.g. 
that A does not belong to some B. Clearly then we must suppose 
the contradictory. 

Again suppose that A belongs to some B, and let it have been 
assumed that C belongs to all A. It is necessary then that C 
should belong to some B. But let this be impossible, so that the 
supposition is false: in that case it is true that A belongs to no B. 
We may proceed in the same way if the proposition CA has been 
taken as negative. But if the premiss assumed concerns B, no 
syllogism will be possible. If the contrary is supposed, we shall 
have a syllogism and an impossible conclusion, but the problem 
in hand is not proved. Suppose that A belongs to all B, and let it 
have been assumed that C belongs to all A. It is necessary then 
that C should belong to all B. But this is impossible, so that it is 
false that A belongs to all B. But we have not yet shown it to be 
necessary that A belongs to no B, if it does not belong to all B. 
Similarly if the other premiss taken concerns B; we shall have a 
syllogism and a conclusion which is impossible, but the 


hypothesis is not refuted. Therefore it is the contradictory that 
we must suppose. 

To prove that A does not belong to all B, we must suppose that it 
belongs to all B: for if A belongs to all B, and C to all A, then C 
belongs to all B; so that if this is impossible, the hypothesis is 
false. Similarly if the other premiss assumed concerns B. The 
same results if the original proposition CA was negative: for 
thus also we get a syllogism. But if the negative proposition 
concerns B, nothing is proved. If the hypothesis is that A 
belongs not to all but to some B, it is not proved that A belongs 
not to all B, but that it belongs to no B. For if A belongs to some 
B, and C to all A, then C will belong to some B. If then this is 
impossible, it is false that A belongs to some B; consequently it 
is true that A belongs to no B. But if this is proved, the truth is 
refuted as well; for the original conclusion was that A belongs to 
some B, and does not belong to some B. Further the impossible 
does not result from the hypothesis: for then the hypothesis 
would be false, since it is impossible to draw a false conclusion 
from true premisses: but in fact it is true: for A belongs to some 

B. Consequently we must not suppose that A belongs to some B, 
but that it belongs to all B. Similarly if we should be proving that 
A does not belong to some B: for if ‘not to belong to some’ and 
‘to belong not to all’ have the same meaning, the demonstration 
of both will be identical. 
It is clear then that not the contrary but the contradictory ought 
to be supposed in all the syllogisms. For thus we shall have 
necessity of inference, and the claim we make is one that will 
be generally accepted. For if of everything one or other of two 
contradictory statements holds good, then if it is proved that 
the negation does not hold, the affirmation must be true. Again 
if it is not admitted that the affirmation is true, the claim that 
the negation is true will be generally accepted. But in neither 
way does it suit to maintain the contrary: for it is not necessary 


that if the universal negative is false, the universal affirmative 
should be true, nor is it generally accepted that if the one is 
false the other is true. 

It is clear then that in the first figure all problems except the 
universal affirmative are proved per impossibile. But in the 
middle and the last figures this also is proved. Suppose that A 
does not belong to all B, and let it have been assumed that A 
belongs to all C. If then A belongs not to all B, but to all C, C will 
not belong to all B. But this is impossible (for suppose it to be 
clear that C belongs to all B): consequently the hypothesis is 
false. It is true then that A belongs to all B. But if the contrary is 
supposed, we shall have a syllogism and a result which is 
impossible: but the problem in hand is not proved. For if A 
belongs to no B, and to all C, C will belong to no B. This is 
impossible; so that it is false that A belongs to no B. But though 
this is false, it does not follow that it is true that A belongs to all 

B. 
When A belongs to some B, suppose that A belongs to no B, and 
let A belong to all C. It is necessary then that C should belong to 
no B. Consequently, if this is impossible, A must belong to some 

B. But if it is supposed that A does not belong to some B, we 
shall have the same results as in the first figure. 
Again suppose that A belongs to some B, and let A belong to no 

C. It is necessary then that C should not belong to some B. But 
originally it belonged to all B, consequently the hypothesis is 
false: A then will belong to no B. 

When A does not belong to an B, suppose it does belong to all B, 
and to no C. It is necessary then that C should belong to no B. 
But this is impossible: so that it is true that A does not belong to 
all B. It is clear then that all the syllogisms can be formed in the 
middle figure. 

Similarly they can all be formed in the last figure. Suppose that 
A does not belong to some B, but C belongs to all B: then A does 
not belong to some C. If then this is impossible, it is false that A 
does not belong to some B; so that it is true that A belongs to all 

B. But if it is supposed that A belongs to no B, we shall have a 
syllogism and a conclusion which is impossible: but the 
problem in hand is not proved: for if the contrary is supposed, 
we shall have the same results as before. 
But to prove that A belongs to some B, this hypothesis must be 
made. If A belongs to no B, and C to some B, A will belong not to 
all C. If then this is false, it is true that A belongs to some B. 

When A belongs to no B, suppose A belongs to some B, and let it 
have been assumed that C belongs to all B. Then it is necessary 
that A should belong to some C. But ex hypothesi it belongs to 
no C, so that it is false that A belongs to some B. But if it is 
supposed that A belongs to all B, the problem is not proved. 

But this hypothesis must be made if we are prove that A belongs 
not to all B. For if A belongs to all B and C to some B, then A 
belongs to some C. But this we assumed not to be so, so it is 
false that A belongs to all B. But in that case it is true that A 
belongs not to all B. If however it is assumed that A belongs to 
some B, we shall have the same result as before. 


It is clear then that in all the syllogisms which proceed per 
impossibile the contradictory must be assumed. And it is plain 
that in the middle figure an affirmative conclusion, and in the 
last figure a universal conclusion, are proved in a way. 

Demonstration per impossibile differs from ostensive proof in 
that it posits what it wishes to refute by reduction to a 
statement admitted to be false; whereas ostensive proof starts 
from admitted positions. Both, indeed, take two premisses that 
are admitted, but the latter takes the premisses from which the 
syllogism starts, the former takes one of these, along with the 
contradictory of the original conclusion. Also in the ostensive 
proof it is not necessary that the conclusion should be known, 
nor that one should suppose beforehand that it is true or not: in 
the other it is necessary to suppose beforehand that it is not 
true. It makes no difference whether the conclusion is 
affirmative or negative; the method is the same in both cases. 
Everything which is concluded ostensively can be proved per 
impossibile, and that which is proved per impossibile can be 
proved ostensively, through the same terms. Whenever the 
syllogism is formed in the first figure, the truth will be found in 
the middle or the last figure, if negative in the middle, if 
affirmative in the last. Whenever the syllogism is formed in the 
middle figure, the truth will be found in the first, whatever the 
problem may be. Whenever the syllogism is formed in the last 
figure, the truth will be found in the first and middle figures, if 
affirmative in first, if negative in the middle. Suppose that A has 
been proved to belong to no B, or not to all B, through the first 
figure. Then the hypothesis must have been that A belongs to 
some B, and the original premisses that C belongs to all A and to 


no B. For thus the syllogism was made and the impossible 
conclusion reached. But this is the middle figure, if C belongs to 
all A and to no B. And it is clear from these premisses that A 
belongs to no B. Similarly if has been proved not to belong to all 

B. For the hypothesis is that A belongs to all B; and the original 
premisses are that C belongs to all A but not to all B. Similarly 
too, if the premiss CA should be negative: for thus also we have 
the middle figure. Again suppose it has been proved that A 
belongs to some B. The hypothesis here is that is that A belongs 
to no B; and the original premisses that B belongs to all C, and A 
either to all or to some C: for in this way we shall get what is 
impossible. But if A and B belong to all C, we have the last 
figure. And it is clear from these premisses that A must belong 
to some B. Similarly if B or A should be assumed to belong to 
some C. 
Again suppose it has been proved in the middle figure that A 
belongs to all B. Then the hypothesis must have been that A 
belongs not to all B, and the original premisses that A belongs to 
all C, and C to all B: for thus we shall get what is impossible. But 
if A belongs to all C, and C to all B, we have the first figure. 
Similarly if it has been proved that A belongs to some B: for the 
hypothesis then must have been that A belongs to no B, and the 
original premisses that A belongs to all C, and C to some B. If 
the syllogism is negative, the hypothesis must have been that A 
belongs to some B, and the original premisses that A belongs to 
no C, and C to all B, so that the first figure results. If the 
syllogism is not universal, but proof has been given that A does 
not belong to some B, we may infer in the same way. The 
hypothesis is that A belongs to all B, the original premisses that 
A belongs to no C, and C belongs to some B: for thus we get the 
first figure. 

Again suppose it has been proved in the third figure that A 
belongs to all B. Then the hypothesis must have been that A 


belongs not to all B, and the original premisses that C belongs to 
all B, and A belongs to all C; for thus we shall get what is 
impossible. And the original premisses form the first figure. 
Similarly if the demonstration establishes a particular 
proposition: the hypothesis then must have been that A belongs 
to no B, and the original premisses that C belongs to some B, 
and A to all C. If the syllogism is negative, the hypothesis must 
have been that A belongs to some B, and the original premisses 
that C belongs to no A and to all B, and this is the middle figure. 
Similarly if the demonstration is not universal. The hypothesis 
will then be that A belongs to all B, the premisses that C belongs 
to no A and to some B: and this is the middle figure. 

It is clear then that it is possible through the same terms to 
prove each of the problems ostensively as well. Similarly it will 
be possible if the syllogisms are ostensive to reduce them ad 
impossibile in the terms which have been taken, whenever the 
contradictory of the conclusion of the ostensive syllogism is 
taken as a premiss. For the syllogisms become identical with 
those which are obtained by means of conversion, so that we 
obtain immediately the figures through which each problem 
will be solved. It is clear then that every thesis can be proved in 
both ways, i.e. per impossibile and ostensively, and it is not 
possible to separate one method from the other. 

In what figure it is possible to draw a conclusion from 
premisses which are opposed, and in what figure this is not 
possible, will be made clear in this way. Verbally four kinds of 
opposition are possible, viz. universal affirmative to universal 
negative, universal affirmative to particular negative, particular 


affirmative to universal negative, and particular affirmative to 
particular negative: but really there are only three: for the 
particular affirmative is only verbally opposed to the particular 
negative. Of the genuine opposites I call those which are 
universal contraries, the universal affirmative and the universal 
negative, e.g. ‘every science is good’, ‘no science is good’; the 
others I call contradictories. 

In the first figure no syllogism whether affirmative or negative 
can be made out of opposed premisses: no affirmative syllogism 
is possible because both premisses must be affirmative, but 
opposites are, the one affirmative, the other negative: no 
negative syllogism is possible because opposites affirm and 
deny the same predicate of the same subject, and the middle 
term in the first figure is not predicated of both extremes, but 
one thing is denied of it, and it is affirmed of something else: 
but such premisses are not opposed. 

In the middle figure a syllogism can be made both 
oLcontradictories and of contraries. Let A stand for good, let B 
and C stand for science. If then one assumes that every science 
is good, and no science is good, A belongs to all B and to no C, so 
that B belongs to no C: no science then is a science. Similarly if 
after taking ‘every science is good’ one took ‘the science of 
medicine is not good’; for A belongs to all B but to no C, so that 
a particular science will not be a science. Again, a particular 
science will not be a science if A belongs to all C but to no B, and 
B is science, C medicine, and A supposition: for after taking ‘no 
science is supposition’, one has assumed that a particular 
science is supposition. This syllogism differs from the preceding 
because the relations between the terms are reversed: before, 
the affirmative statement concerned B, now it concerns C. 
Similarly if one premiss is not universal: for the middle term is 
always that which is stated negatively of one extreme, and 
affirmatively of the other. Consequently it is possible that 


contradictories may lead to a conclusion, though not always or 
in every mood, but only if the terms subordinate to the middle 
are such that they are either identical or related as whole to 
part. Otherwise it is impossible: for the premisses cannot 
anyhow be either contraries or contradictories. 

In the third figure an affirmative syllogism can never be made 
out of opposite premisses, for the reason given in reference to 
the first figure; but a negative syllogism is possible whether the 
terms are universal or not. Let B and C stand for science, A for 
medicine. If then one should assume that all medicine is 
science and that no medicine is science, he has assumed that B 
belongs to all A and C to no A, so that a particular science will 
not be a science. Similarly if the premiss BA is not assumed 
universally. For if some medicine is science and again no 
medicine is science, it results that some science is not science, 
The premisses are contrary if the terms are taken universally; if 
one is particular, they are contradictory. 

We must recognize that it is possible to take opposites in the 
way we said, viz. ‘all science is good’ and ‘no science is good’ or 
‘some science is not good’. This does not usually escape notice. 
But it is possible to establish one part of a contradiction through 
other premisses, or to assume it in the way suggested in the 
Topics. Since there are three oppositions to affirmative 
statements, it follows that opposite statements may be 
assumed as premisses in six ways; we may have either 
universal affirmative and negative, or universal affirmative and 
particular negative, or particular affirmative and universal 
negative, and the relations between the terms may be reversed; 

e.g.A may belong to all B and to no C, or to all C and to no B, or 
to all of the one, not to all of the other; here too the relation 
between the terms may be reversed. Similarly in the third 
figure. So it is clear in how many ways and in what figures a 

syllogism can be made by means of premisses which are 
opposed. 

It is clear too that from false premisses it is possible to draw a 
true conclusion, as has been said before, but it is not possible if 
the premisses are opposed. For the syllogism is always contrary 
to the fact, e.g. if a thing is good, it is proved that it is not good, 
if an animal, that it is not an animal because the syllogism 
springs out of a contradiction and the terms presupposed are 
either identical or related as whole and part. It is evident also 
that in fallacious reasonings nothing prevents a contradiction to 
the hypothesis from resulting, e.g. if something is odd, it is not 
odd. For the syllogism owed its contrariety to its contradictory 
premisses; if we assume such premisses we shall get a result 
that contradicts our hypothesis. But we must recognize that 
contraries cannot be inferred from a single syllogism in such a 
way that we conclude that what is not good is good, or anything 
of that sort unless a self-contradictory premiss is at once 
assumed, e.g. ‘every animal is white and not white’, and we 
proceed ‘man is an animal’. Either we must introduce the 
contradiction by an additional assumption, assuming, e.g., that 
every science is supposition, and then assuming ‘Medicine is a 
science, but none of it is supposition’ (which is the mode in 
which refutations are made), or we must argue from two 
syllogisms. In no other way than this, as was said before, is it 
possible that the premisses should be really contrary. 

To beg and assume the original question is a species of failure 
to demonstrate the problem proposed; but this happens in 
many ways. A man may not reason syllogistically at all, or he 



may argue from premisses which are less known or equally 
unknown, or he may establish the antecedent by means of its 
consequents; for demonstration proceeds from what is more 
certain and is prior. Now begging the question is none of these: 
but since we get to know some things naturally through 
themselves, and other things by means of something else (the 
first principles through themselves, what is subordinate to 
them through something else), whenever a man tries to prove 
what is not self-evident by means of itself, then he begs the 
original question. This may be done by assuming what is in 
question at once; it is also possible to make a transition to other 
things which would naturally be proved through the thesis 
proposed, and demonstrate it through them, e.g. if A should be 
proved through B, and B through C, though it was natural that C 
should be proved through A: for it turns out that those who 
reason thus are proving A by means of itself. This is what those 
persons do who suppose that they are constructing parallel 
straight lines: for they fail to see that they are assuming facts 
which it is impossible to demonstrate unless the parallels exist. 
So it turns out that those who reason thus merely say a 
particular thing is, if it is: in this way everything will be self-
evident. But that is impossible. 

If then it is uncertain whether A belongs to C, and also whether 
A belongs to B, and if one should assume that A does belong to 
B, it is not yet clear whether he begs the original question, but it 
is evident that he is not demonstrating: for what is as uncertain 
as the question to be answered cannot be a principle of a 
demonstration. If however B is so related to C that they are 
identical, or if they are plainly convertible, or the one belongs to 
the other, the original question is begged. For one might equally 
well prove that A belongs to B through those terms if they are 
convertible. But if they are not convertible, it is the fact that they 
are not that prevents such a demonstration, not the method of 
demonstrating. But if one were to make the conversion, then he 


would be doing what we have described and effecting a 
reciprocal proof with three propositions. 

Similarly if he should assume that B belongs to C, this being as 
uncertain as the question whether A belongs to C, the question 
is not yet begged, but no demonstration is made. If however A 
and B are identical either because they are convertible or 
because A follows B, then the question is begged for the same 
reason as before. For we have explained the meaning of begging 
the question, viz. proving that which is not self-evident by 
means of itself. 

If then begging the question is proving what is not self-evident 
by means of itself, in other words failing to prove when the 
failure is due to the thesis to be proved and the premiss through 
which it is proved being equally uncertain, either because 
predicates which are identical belong to the same subject, or 
because the same predicate belongs to subjects which are 
identical, the question may be begged in the middle and third 
figures in both ways, though, if the syllogism is affirmative, only 
in the third and first figures. If the syllogism is negative, the 
question is begged when identical predicates are denied of the 
same subject; and both premisses do not beg the question 
indifferently (in a similar way the question may be begged in 
the middle figure), because the terms in negative syllogisms are 
not convertible. In scientific demonstrations the question is 
begged when the terms are really related in the manner 
described, in dialectical arguments when they are according to 
common opinion so related. 


The objection that ‘this is not the reason why the result is false’, 
which we frequently make in argument, is made primarily in 
the case of a reductio ad impossibile, to rebut the proposition 
which was being proved by the reduction. For unless a man has 
contradicted this proposition he will not say, ‘False cause’, but 
urge that something false has been assumed in the earlier parts 
of the argument; nor will he use the formula in the case of an 
ostensive proof; for here what one denies is not assumed as a 
premiss. Further when anything is refuted ostensively by the 
terms ABC, it cannot be objected that the syllogism does not 
depend on the assumption laid down. For we use the expression 
‘false cause’, when the syllogism is concluded in spite of the 
refutation of this position; but that is not possible in ostensive 
proofs: since if an assumption is refuted, a syllogism can no 
longer be drawn in reference to it. It is clear then that the 
expression ‘false cause’ can only be used in the case of a 
reductio ad impossibile, and when the original hypothesis is so 
related to the impossible conclusion, that the conclusion results 
indifferently whether the hypothesis is made or not. The most 
obvious case of the irrelevance of an assumption to a 
conclusion which is false is when a syllogism drawn from 
middle terms to an impossible conclusion is independent of the 
hypothesis, as we have explained in the Topics. For to put that 
which is not the cause as the cause, is just this: e.g. if a man, 
wishing to prove that the diagonal of the square is 
incommensurate with the side, should try to prove Zeno’s 
theorem that motion is impossible, and so establish a reductio 
ad impossibile: for Zeno’s false theorem has no connexion at all 
with the original assumption. Another case is where the 
impossible conclusion is connected with the hypothesis, but 
does not result from it. This may happen whether one traces the 
connexion upwards or downwards, e.g. if it is laid down that A 
belongs to B, B to C, and C to D, and it should be false that B 


belongs to D: for if we eliminated A and assumed all the same 
that B belongs to C and C to D, the false conclusion would not 
depend on the original hypothesis. Or again trace the connexion 
upwards; e.g. suppose that A belongs to B, E to A and F to E, it 
being false that F belongs to A. In this way too the impossible 
conclusion would result, though the original hypothesis were 
eliminated. But the impossible conclusion ought to be 
connected with the original terms: in this way it will depend on 
the hypothesis, e.g. when one traces the connexion downwards, 
the impossible conclusion must be connected with that term 
which is predicate in the hypothesis: for if it is impossible that 
A should belong to D, the false conclusion will no longer result 
after A has been eliminated. If one traces the connexion 
upwards, the impossible conclusion must be connected with 
that term which is subject in the hypothesis: for if it is 
impossible that F should belong to B, the impossible conclusion 
will disappear if B is eliminated. Similarly when the syllogisms 
are negative. 

It is clear then that when the impossibility is not related to the 
original terms, the false conclusion does not result on account 
of the assumption. Or perhaps even so it may sometimes be 
independent. For if it were laid down that A belongs not to B but 
to K, and that K belongs to C and C to D, the impossible 
conclusion would still stand. Similarly if one takes the terms in 
an ascending series. Consequently since the impossibility 
results whether the first assumption is suppressed or not, it 
would appear to be independent of that assumption. Or perhaps 
we ought not to understand the statement that the false 
conclusion results independently of the assumption, in the 
sense that if something else were supposed the impossibility 
would result; but rather we mean that when the first 
assumption is eliminated, the same impossibility results 
through the remaining premisses; since it is not perhaps absurd 
that the same false result should follow from several 


hypotheses, e.g. that parallels meet, both on the assumption 
that the interior angle is greater than the exterior and on the 
assumption that a triangle contains more than two right angles. 

18 

A false argument depends on the first false statement in it. 
Every syllogism is made out of two or more premisses. If then 
the false conclusion is drawn from two premisses, one or both 
of them must be false: for (as we proved) a false syllogism 
cannot be drawn from two premisses. But if the premisses are 
more than two, e.g. if C is established through A and B, and 
these through D, E, F, and G, one of these higher propositions 
must be false, and on this the argument depends: for A and B 
are inferred by means of D, E, F, and G. Therefore the conclusion 
and the error results from one of them. 

19 

In order to avoid having a syllogism drawn against us we must 
take care, whenever an opponent asks us to admit the reason 
without the conclusions, not to grant him the same term twice 
over in his premisses, since we know that a syllogism cannot be 
drawn without a middle term, and that term which is stated 
more than once is the middle. How we ought to watch the 
middle in reference to each conclusion, is evident from our 
knowing what kind of thesis is proved in each figure. This will 
not escape us since we know how we are maintaining the 
argument. 


That which we urge men to beware of in their admissions, they 
ought in attack to try to conceal. This will be possible first, if, 
instead of drawing the conclusions of preliminary syllogisms, 
they take the necessary premisses and leave the conclusions in 
the dark; secondly if instead of inviting assent to propositions 
which are closely connected they take as far as possible those 
that are not connected by middle terms. For example suppose 
that A is to be inferred to be true of F, B, C, D, and E being middle 
terms. One ought then to ask whether A belongs to B, and next 
whether D belongs to E, instead of asking whether B belongs to 
C; after that he may ask whether B belongs to C, and so on. If 
the syllogism is drawn through one middle term, he ought to 
begin with that: in this way he will most likely deceive his 
opponent. 

Since we know when a syllogism can be formed and how its 
terms must be related, it is clear when refutation will be 
possible and when impossible. A refutation is possible whether 
everything is conceded, or the answers alternate (one, I mean, 
being affirmative, the other negative). For as has been shown a 
syllogism is possible whether the terms are related in 
affirmative propositions or one proposition is affirmative, the 
other negative: consequently, if what is laid down is contrary to 
the conclusion, a refutation must take place: for a refutation is a 
syllogism which establishes the contradictory. But if nothing is 
conceded, a refutation is impossible: for no syllogism is possible 
(as we saw) when all the terms are negative: therefore no 
refutation is possible. For if a refutation were possible, a 
syllogism must be possible; although if a syllogism is possible it 
does not follow that a refutation is possible. Similarly refutation 


is not possible if nothing is conceded universally: since the 
fields of refutation and syllogism are defined in the same way. 

It sometimes happens that just as we are deceived in the 
arrangement of the terms, so error may arise in our thought 
about them, e.g. if it is possible that the same predicate should 
belong to more than one subject immediately, but although 
knowing the one, a man may forget the other and think the 
opposite true. Suppose that A belongs to B and to C in virtue of 
their nature, and that B and C belong to all D in the same way. If 
then a man thinks that A belongs to all B, and B to D, but A to no 
C, and C to all D, he will both know and not know the same 
thing in respect of the same thing. Again if a man were to make 
a mistake about the members of a single series; e.g. suppose A 
belongs to B, B to C, and C to D, but some one thinks that A 
belongs to all B, but to no C: he will both know that A belongs to 
D, and think that it does not. Does he then maintain after this 
simply that what he knows, he does not think? For he knows in 
a way that A belongs to C through B, since the part is included 
in the whole; so that what he knows in a way, this he maintains 
he does not think at all: but that is impossible. 

In the former case, where the middle term does not belong to 
the same series, it is not possible to think both the premisses 
with reference to each of the two middle terms: e.g. that A 
belongs to all B, but to no C, and both B and C belong to all D. 
For it turns out that the first premiss of the one syllogism is 
either wholly or partially contrary to the first premiss of the 
other. For if he thinks that A belongs to everything to which B 
belongs, and he knows that B belongs to D, then he knows that 


A belongs to D. Consequently if again he thinks that A belongs 
to nothing to which C belongs, he thinks that A does not belong 
to some of that to which B belongs; but if he thinks that A 
belongs to everything to which B belongs, and again thinks that 
A does not belong to some of that to which B belongs, these 
beliefs are wholly or partially contrary. In this way then it is not 
possible to think; but nothing prevents a man thinking one 
premiss of each syllogism of both premisses of one of the two 
syllogisms: e.g. A belongs to all B, and B to D, and again A 
belongs to no C. An error of this kind is similar to the error into 
which we fall concerning particulars: e.g. if A belongs to all B, 
and B to all C, A will belong to all C. If then a man knows that A 
belongs to everything to which B belongs, he knows that A 
belongs to C. But nothing prevents his being ignorant that C 
exists; e.g. let A stand for two right angles, B for triangle, C for a 
particular diagram of a triangle. A man might think that C did 
not exist, though he knew that every triangle contains two right 
angles; consequently he will know and not know the same 
thing at the same time. For the expression ‘to know that every 
triangle has its angles equal to two right angles’ is ambiguous, 
meaning to have the knowledge either of the universal or of the 
particulars. Thus then he knows that C contains two right 
angles with a knowledge of the universal, but not with a 
knowledge of the particulars; consequently his knowledge will 
not be contrary to his ignorance. The argument in the Meno that 
learning is recollection may be criticized in a similar way. For it 
never happens that a man starts with a foreknowledge of the 
particular, but along with the process of being led to see the 
general principle he receives a knowledge of the particulars, by 
an act (as it were) of recognition. For we know some things 
directly; e.g. that the angles are equal to two right angles, if we 
know that the figure is a triangle. Similarly in all other cases. 

By a knowledge of the universal then we see the particulars, but 
we do not know them by the kind of knowledge which is proper 


to them; consequently it is possible that we may make mistakes 
about them, but not that we should have the knowledge and 
error that are contrary to one another: rather we have the 
knowledge of the universal but make a mistake in 
apprehending the particular. Similarly in the cases stated above. 
The error in respect of the middle term is not contrary to the 
knowledge obtained through the syllogism, nor is the thought 
in respect of one middle term contrary to that in respect of the 
other. Nothing prevents a man who knows both that A belongs 
to the whole of B, and that B again belongs to C, thinking that A 
does not belong to C, e.g. knowing that every mule is sterile and 
that this is a mule, and thinking that this animal is with foal: for 
he does not know that A belongs to C, unless he considers the 
two propositions together. So it is evident that if he knows the 
one and does not know the other, he will fall into error. And this 
is the relation of knowledge of the universal to knowledge of 
the particular. For we know no sensible thing, once it has 
passed beyond the range of our senses, even if we happen to 
have perceived it, except by means of the universal and the 
possession of the knowledge which is proper to the particular, 
but without the actual exercise of that knowledge. For to know 
is used in three senses: it may mean either to have knowledge 
of the universal or to have knowledge proper to the matter in 
hand or to exercise such knowledge: consequently three kinds 
of error also are possible. Nothing then prevents a man both 
knowing and being mistaken about the same thing, provided 
that his knowledge and his error are not contrary. And this 
happens also to the man whose knowledge is limited to each of 
the premisses and who has not previously considered the 
particular question. For when he thinks that the mule is with 
foal he has not the knowledge in the sense of its actual exercise, 
nor on the other hand has his thought caused an error contrary 
to his knowledge: for the error contrary to the knowledge of the 
universal would be a syllogism. 


But he who thinks the essence of good is the essence of bad will 
think the same thing to be the essence of good and the essence 
of bad. Let A stand for the essence of good and B for the essence 
of bad, and again C for the essence of good. Since then he thinks 
B and C identical, he will think that C is B, and similarly that B is 
A, consequently that C is A. For just as we saw that if B is true of 
all of which C is true, and A is true of all of which B is true, A is 
true of C, similarly with the word ‘think’. Similarly also with the 
word ‘is’; for we saw that if C is the same as B, and B as A, C is 
the same as A. Similarly therefore with ‘opine’. Perhaps then 
this is necessary if a man will grant the first point. But 
presumably that is false, that any one could suppose the 
essence of good to be the essence of bad, save incidentally. For it 
is possible to think this in many different ways. But we must 
consider this matter better. 

Whenever the extremes are convertible it is necessary that the 
middle should be convertible with both. For if A belongs to C 
through B, then if A and C are convertible and C belongs 
everything to which A belongs, B is convertible with A, and B 
belongs to everything to which A belongs, through C as middle, 
and C is convertible with B through A as middle. Similarly if the 
conclusion is negative, e.g. if B belongs to C, but A does not 
belong to B, neither will A belong to C. If then B is convertible 
with A, C will be convertible with A. Suppose B does not belong 
to A; neither then will C: for ex hypothesi B belonged to all C. 
And if C is convertible with B, B is convertible also with A, for C 
is said of that of all of which B is said. And if C is convertible in 
relation to A and to B, B also is convertible in relation to A. For C 
belongs to that to which B belongs: but C does not belong to 


that to which A belongs. And this alone starts from the 
conclusion; the preceding moods do not do so as in the 
affirmative syllogism. Again if A and B are convertible, and 
similarly C and D, and if A or C must belong to anything 
whatever, then B and D will be such that one or other belongs to 
anything whatever. For since B belongs to that to which A 
belongs, and D belongs to that to which C belongs, and since A 
or C belongs to everything, but not together, it is clear that B or 
D belongs to everything, but not together. For example if that 
which is uncreated is incorruptible and that which is 
incorruptible is uncreated, it is necessary that what is created 
should be corruptible and what is corruptible should have been 
created. For two syllogisms have been put together. Again if A or 
B belongs to everything and if C or D belongs to everything, but 
they cannot belong together, then when A and C are convertible 
B and D are convertible. For if B does not belong to something to 
which D belongs, it is clear that A belongs to it. But if A then C: 
for they are convertible. Therefore C and D belong together. But 
this is impossible. When A belongs to the whole of B and to C 
and is affirmed of nothing else, and B also belongs to all C, it is 
necessary that A and B should be convertible: for since A is said 
of B and C only, and B is affirmed both of itself and of C, it is 
clear that B will be said of everything of which A is said, except 
A itself. Again when A and B belong to the whole of C, and C is 
convertible with B, it is necessary that A should belong to all B: 
for since A belongs to all C, and C to B by conversion, A will 
belong to all B. 

When, of two opposites A and B, A is preferable to B, and 
similarly D is preferable to C, then if A and C together are 
preferable to B and D together, A must be preferable to D. For A 
is an object of desire to the same extent as B is an object of 
aversion, since they are opposites: and C is similarly related to 
D, since they also are opposites. If then A is an object of desire 
to the same extent as D, B is an object of aversion to the same 


extent as C (since each is to the same extent as each – the one 
an object of aversion, the other an object of desire). Therefore 
both A and C together, and B and D together, will be equally 
objects of desire or aversion. But since A and C are preferable to 
B and D, A cannot be equally desirable with D; for then B along 
with D would be equally desirable with A along with C. But if D 
is preferable to A, then B must be less an object of aversion than 

C: for the less is opposed to the less. But the greater good and 
lesser evil are preferable to the lesser good and greater evil: the 
whole BD then is preferable to the whole AC. But ex hypothesi 
this is not so. A then is preferable to D, and C consequently is 
less an object of aversion than B. If then every lover in virtue of 
his love would prefer A, viz. that the beloved should be such as 
to grant a favour, and yet should not grant it (for which C 
stands), to the beloved’s granting the favour (represented by D) 
without being such as to grant it (represented by B), it is clear 
that A (being of such a nature) is preferable to granting the 
favour. To receive affection then is preferable in love to sexual 
intercourse. Love then is more dependent on friendship than on 
intercourse. And if it is most dependent on receiving affection, 
then this is its end. Intercourse then either is not an end at all 
or is an end relative to the further end, the receiving of 
affection. And indeed the same is true of the other desires and 
arts. 
It is clear then how the terms are related in conversion, and in 
respect of being in a higher degree objects of aversion or of 
desire. We must now state that not only dialectical and 
demonstrative syllogisms are formed by means of the aforesaid 
figures, but also rhetorical syllogisms and in general any form of 


persuasion, however it may be presented. For every belief comes 
either through syllogism or from induction. 

Now induction, or rather the syllogism which springs out of 
induction, consists in establishing syllogistically a relation 
between one extreme and the middle by means of the other 
extreme, e.g. if B is the middle term between A and C, it consists 
in proving through C that A belongs to B. For this is the manner 
in which we make inductions. For example let A stand for long-
lived, B for bileless, and C for the particular long-lived animals, 

e.g. man, horse, mule. A then belongs to the whole of C: for 
whatever is bileless is long-lived. But B also (‘not possessing 
bile’) belongs to all C. If then C is convertible with B, and the 
middle term is not wider in extension, it is necessary that A 
should belong to B. For it has already been proved that if two 
things belong to the same thing, and the extreme is convertible 
with one of them, then the other predicate will belong to the 
predicate that is converted. But we must apprehend C as made 
up of all the particulars. For induction proceeds through an 
enumeration of all the cases. 
Such is the syllogism which establishes the first and immediate 
premiss: for where there is a middle term the syllogism 
proceeds through the middle term; when there is no middle 
term, through induction. And in a way induction is opposed to 
syllogism: for the latter proves the major term to belong to the 
third term by means of the middle, the former proves the major 
to belong to the middle by means of the third. In the order of 
nature, syllogism through the middle term is prior and better 
known, but syllogism through induction is clearer to us. 


We have an ‘example’ when the major term is proved to belong 
to the middle by means of a term which resembles the third. It 
ought to be known both that the middle belongs to the third 
term, and that the first belongs to that which resembles the 
third. For example let A be evil, B making war against 
neighbours, C Athenians against Thebans, D Thebans against 
Phocians. If then we wish to prove that to fight with the 
Thebans is an evil, we must assume that to fight against 
neighbours is an evil. Evidence of this is obtained from similar 
cases, e.g. that the war against the Phocians was an evil to the 
Thebans. Since then to fight against neighbours is an evil, and 
to fight against the Thebans is to fight against neighbours, it is 
clear that to fight against the Thebans is an evil. Now it is clear 
that B belongs to C and to D (for both are cases of making war 
upon one’s neighbours) and that A belongs to D (for the war 
against the Phocians did not turn out well for the Thebans): but 
that A belongs to B will be proved through D. Similarly if the 
belief in the relation of the middle term to the extreme should 
be produced by several similar cases. Clearly then to argue by 
example is neither like reasoning from part to whole, nor like 
reasoning from whole to part, but rather reasoning from part to 
part, when both particulars are subordinate to the same term, 
and one of them is known. It differs from induction, because 
induction starting from all the particular cases proves (as we 
saw) that the major term belongs to the middle, and does not 
apply the syllogistic conclusion to the minor term, whereas 
argument by example does make this application and does not 
draw its proof from all the particular cases. 


By reduction we mean an argument in which the first term 
clearly belongs to the middle, but the relation of the middle to 
the last term is uncertain though equally or more probable than 
the conclusion; or again an argument in which the terms 
intermediate between the last term and the middle are few. For 
in any of these cases it turns out that we approach more nearly 
to knowledge. For example let A stand for what can be taught, B 
for knowledge, C for justice. Now it is clear that knowledge can 
be taught: but it is uncertain whether virtue is knowledge. If 
now the statement BC is equally or more probable than AC, we 
have a reduction: for we are nearer to knowledge, since we have 
taken a new term, being so far without knowledge that A 
belongs to C. Or again suppose that the terms intermediate 
between B and C are few: for thus too we are nearer knowledge. 
For example let D stand for squaring, E for rectilinear figure, F 
for circle. If there were only one term intermediate between E 
and F (viz. that the circle is made equal to a rectilinear figure by 
the help of lunules), we should be near to knowledge. But when 
BC is not more probable than AC, and the intermediate terms 
are not few, I do not call this reduction: nor again when the 
statement BC is immediate: for such a statement is knowledge. 

An objection is a premiss contrary to a premiss. It differs from a 
premiss, because it may be particular, but a premiss either 
cannot be particular at all or not in universal syllogisms. An 
objection is brought in two ways and through two figures; in 
two ways because every objection is either universal or 
particular, by two figures because objections are brought in 


opposition to the premiss, and opposites can be proved only in 
the first and third figures. If a man maintains a universal 
affirmative, we reply with a universal or a particular negative; 
the former is proved from the first figure, the latter from the 
third. For example let stand for there being a single science, B 
for contraries. If a man premises that contraries are subjects of 
a single science, the objection may be either that opposites are 
never subjects of a single science, and contraries are opposites, 
so that we get the first figure, or that the knowable and the 
unknowable are not subjects of a single science: this proof is in 
the third figure: for it is true of C (the knowable and the 
unknowable) that they are contraries, and it is false that they 
are the subjects of a single science. 

Similarly if the premiss objected to is negative. For if a man 
maintains that contraries are not subjects of a single science, 
we reply either that all opposites or that certain contraries, e.g. 
what is healthy and what is sickly, are subjects of the same 
science: the former argument issues from the first, the latter 
from the third figure. 

In general if a man urges a universal objection he must frame 
his contradiction with reference to the universal of the terms 
taken by his opponent, e.g. if a man maintains that contraries 
are not subjects of the same science, his opponent must reply 
that there is a single science of all opposites. Thus we must 
have the first figure: for the term which embraces the original 
subject becomes the middle term. 

If the objection is particular, the objector must frame his 
contradiction with reference to a term relatively to which the 
subject of his opponent’s premiss is universal, e.g. he will point 
out that the knowable and the unknowable are not subjects of 
the same science: ‘contraries’ is universal relatively to these. 
And we have the third figure: for the particular term assumed is 


middle, e.g. the knowable and the unknowable. Premisses from 
which it is possible to draw the contrary conclusion are what we 
start from when we try to make objections. Consequently we 
bring objections in these figures only: for in them only are 
opposite syllogisms possible, since the second figure cannot 
produce an affirmative conclusion. 

Besides, an objection in the middle figure would require a fuller 
argument, e.g. if it should not be granted that A belongs to B, 
because C does not follow B. This can be made clear only by 
other premisses. But an objection ought not to turn off into 
other things, but have its new premiss quite clear immediately. 
For this reason also this is the only figure from which proof by 
signs cannot be obtained. 

We must consider later the other kinds of objection, namely the 
objection from contraries, from similars, and from common 
opinion, and inquire whether a particular objection cannot be 
elicited from the first figure or a negative objection from the 
second. 

A probability and a sign are not identical, but a probability is a 
generally approved proposition: what men know to happen or 
not to happen, to be or not to be, for the most part thus and 
thus, is a probability, e.g. ‘the envious hate’, ‘the beloved show 
affection’. A sign means a demonstrative proposition necessary 
or generally approved: for anything such that when it is another 
thing is, or when it has come into being the other has come into 
being before or after, is a sign of the other’s being or having 
come into being. Now an enthymeme is a syllogism starting 
from probabilities or signs, and a sign may be taken in three 


ways, corresponding to the position of the middle term in the 
figures. For it may be taken as in the first figure or the second or 
the third. For example the proof that a woman is with child 
because she has milk is in the first figure: for to have milk is the 
middle term. Let A represent to be with child, B to have milk, C 
woman. The proof that wise men are good, since Pittacus is 
good, comes through the last figure. Let A stand for good, B for 
wise men, C for Pittacus. It is true then to affirm both A and B of 

C: only men do not say the latter, because they know it, though 
they state the former. The proof that a woman is with child 
because she is pale is meant to come through the middle figure: 
for since paleness follows women with child and is a 
concomitant of this woman, people suppose it has been proved 
that she is with child. Let A stand for paleness, B for being with 
child, C for woman. Now if the one proposition is stated, we 
have only a sign, but if the other is stated as well, a syllogism, 
e.g. ‘Pittacus is generous, since ambitious men are generous and 
Pittacus is ambitious.’ Or again ‘Wise men are good, since 
Pittacus is not only good but wise.’ In this way then syllogisms 
are formed, only that which proceeds through the first figure is 
irrefutable if it is true (for it is universal), that which proceeds 
through the last figure is refutable even if the conclusion is true, 
since the syllogism is not universal nor correlative to the matter 
in question: for though Pittacus is good, it is not therefore 
necessary that all other wise men should be good. But the 
syllogism which proceeds through the middle figure is always 
refutable in any case: for a syllogism can never be formed when 
the terms are related in this way: for though a woman with 
child is pale, and this woman also is pale, it is not necessary 
that she should be with child. Truth then may be found in signs 
whatever their kind, but they have the differences we have 
stated. 
We must either divide signs in the way stated, and among them 
designate the middle term as the index (for people call that the 


index which makes us know, and the middle term above all has 
this character), or else we must call the arguments derived from 
the extremes signs, that derived from the middle term the 
index: for that which is proved through the first figure is most 
generally accepted and most true. 

It is possible to infer character from features, if it is granted that 
the body and the soul are changed together by the natural 
affections: I say ‘natural’, for though perhaps by learning music 
a man has made some change in his soul, this is not one of 
those affections which are natural to us; rather I refer to 
passions and desires when I speak of natural emotions. If then 
this were granted and also that for each change there is a 
corresponding sign, and we could state the affection and sign 
proper to each kind of animal, we shall be able to infer 
character from features. For if there is an affection which 
belongs properly to an individual kind, e.g. courage to lions, it is 
necessary that there should be a sign of it: for ex hypothesi 
body and soul are affected together. Suppose this sign is the 
possession of large extremities: this may belong to other kinds 
also though not universally. For the sign is proper in the sense 
stated, because the affection is proper to the whole kind, 
though not proper to it alone, according to our usual manner of 
speaking. The same thing then will be found in another kind, 
and man may be brave, and some other kinds of animal as well. 
They will then have the sign: for ex hypothesi there is one sign 
corresponding to each affection. If then this is so, and we can 
collect signs of this sort in these animals which have only one 
affection proper to them – but each affection has its sign, since 
it is necessary that it should have a single sign – we shall then 
be able to infer character from features. But if the kind as a 
whole has two properties, e.g. if the lion is both brave and 
generous, how shall we know which of the signs which are its 
proper concomitants is the sign of a particular affection? 
Perhaps if both belong to some other kind though not to the 


whole of it, and if, in those kinds in which each is found though 
not in the whole of their members, some members possess one 
of the affections and not the other: e.g. if a man is brave but not 
generous, but possesses, of the two signs, large extremities, it is 
clear that this is the sign of courage in the lion also. To judge 
character from features, then, is possible in the first figure if the 
middle term is convertible with the first extreme, but is wider 
than the third term and not convertible with it: e.g. let A stand 
for courage, B for large extremities, and C for lion. B then 
belongs to everything to which C belongs, but also to others. But 
A belongs to everything to which B belongs, and to nothing 
besides, but is convertible with B: otherwise, there would not be 
a single sign correlative with each affection. 


Aristotle - Posterior Analytics 
[Translated by G. R. G. Mure] 


Book I 

All instruction given or received by way of argument proceeds 
from pre-existent knowledge. This becomes evident upon a 
survey of all the species of such instruction. The mathematical 
sciences and all other speculative disciplines are acquired in 
this way, and so are the two forms of dialectical reasoning, 
syllogistic and inductive; for each of these latter make use of 
old knowledge to impart new, the syllogism assuming an 
audience that accepts its premisses, induction exhibiting the 
universal as implicit in the clearly known particular. Again, the 
persuasion exerted by rhetorical arguments is in principle the 
same, since they use either example, a kind of induction, or 
enthymeme, a form of syllogism. 

The pre-existent knowledge required is of two kinds. In some 
cases admission of the fact must be assumed, in others 
comprehension of the meaning of the term used, and 
sometimes both assumptions are essential. Thus, we assume 
that every predicate can be either truly affirmed or truly denied 
of any subject, and that ‘triangle’ means so and so; as regards 
‘unit’ we have to make the double assumption of the meaning 
of the word and the existence of the thing. The reason is that 
these several objects are not equally obvious to us. Recognition 
of a truth may in some cases contain as factors both previous 
knowledge and also knowledge acquired simultaneously with 


that recognition – knowledge, this latter, of the particulars 
actually falling under the universal and therein already virtually 
known. For example, the student knew beforehand that the 
angles of every triangle are equal to two right angles; but it was 
only at the actual moment at which he was being led on to 
recognize this as true in the instance before him that he came 
to know ‘this figure inscribed in the semicircle’ to be a triangle. 
For some things (viz. the singulars finally reached which are not 
predicable of anything else as subject) are only learnt in this 
way, i.e. there is here no recognition through a middle of a 
minor term as subject to a major. Before he was led on to 
recognition or before he actually drew a conclusion, we should 
perhaps say that in a manner he knew, in a manner not. 

If he did not in an unqualified sense of the term know the 
existence of this triangle, how could he know without 
qualification that its angles were equal to two right angles? No: 
clearly he knows not without qualification but only in the sense 
that he knows universally. If this distinction is not drawn, we 
are faced with the dilemma in the Meno: either a man will learn 
nothing or what he already knows; for we cannot accept the 
solution which some people offer. A man is asked, ‘Do you, or do 
you not, know that every pair is even?’ He says he does know it. 
The questioner then produces a particular pair, of the existence, 
and so a fortiori of the evenness, of which he was unaware. The 
solution which some people offer is to assert that they do not 
know that every pair is even, but only that everything which 
they know to be a pair is even: yet what they know to be even is 
that of which they have demonstrated evenness, i.e. what they 
made the subject of their premiss, viz. not merely every triangle 
or number which they know to be such, but any and every 
number or triangle without reservation. For no premiss is ever 
couched in the form ‘every number which you know to be such’, 
or ‘every rectilinear figure which you know to be such’: the 
predicate is always construed as applicable to any and every 


instance of the thing. On the other hand, I imagine there is 
nothing to prevent a man in one sense knowing what he is 
learning, in another not knowing it. The strange thing would be, 
not if in some sense he knew what he was learning, but if he 
were to know it in that precise sense and manner in which he 
was learning it. 

We suppose ourselves to possess unqualified scientific 
knowledge of a thing, as opposed to knowing it in the accidental 
way in which the sophist knows, when we think that we know 
the cause on which the fact depends, as the cause of that fact 
and of no other, and, further, that the fact could not be other 
than it is. Now that scientific knowing is something of this sort 
is evident – witness both those who falsely claim it and those 
who actually possess it, since the former merely imagine 
themselves to be, while the latter are also actually, in the 
condition described. Consequently the proper object of 
unqualified scientific knowledge is something which cannot be 
other than it is. 

There may be another manner of knowing as well – that will be 
discussed later. What I now assert is that at all events we do 
know by demonstration. By demonstration I mean a syllogism 
productive of scientific knowledge, a syllogism, that is, the grasp 
of which is eo ipso such knowledge. Assuming then that my 
thesis as to the nature of scientific knowing is correct, the 
premisses of demonstrated knowledge must be true, primary, 
immediate, better known than and prior to the conclusion, 
which is further related to them as effect to cause. Unless these 
conditions are satisfied, the basic truths will not be 


‘appropriate’ to the conclusion. Syllogism there may indeed be 
without these conditions, but such syllogism, not being 
productive of scientific knowledge, will not be demonstration. 
The premisses must be true: for that which is non-existent 
cannot be known – we cannot know, e.g. that the diagonal of a 
square is commensurate with its side. The premisses must be 
primary and indemonstrable; otherwise they will require 
demonstration in order to be known, since to have knowledge, if 
it be not accidental knowledge, of things which are 
demonstrable, means precisely to have a demonstration of 
them. The premisses must be the causes of the conclusion, 
better known than it, and prior to it; its causes, since we possess 
scientific knowledge of a thing only when we know its cause; 
prior, in order to be causes; antecedently known, this 
antecedent knowledge being not our mere understanding of the 
meaning, but knowledge of the fact as well. Now ‘prior’ and 
‘better known’ are ambiguous terms, for there is a difference 
between what is prior and better known in the order of being 
and what is prior and better known to man. I mean that objects 
nearer to sense are prior and better known to man; objects 
without qualification prior and better known are those further 
from sense. Now the most universal causes are furthest from 
sense and particular causes are nearest to sense, and they are 
thus exactly opposed to one another. In saying that the 
premisses of demonstrated knowledge must be primary, I mean 
that they must be the ‘appropriate’ basic truths, for I identify 
primary premiss and basic truth. A ‘basic truth’ in a 
demonstration is an immediate proposition. An immediate 
proposition is one which has no other proposition prior to it. A 
proposition is either part of an enunciation, i.e. it predicates a 
single attribute of a single subject. If a proposition is dialectical, 
it assumes either part indifferently; if it is demonstrative, it lays 
down one part to the definite exclusion of the other because 
that part is true. The term ‘enunciation’ denotes either part of a 


contradiction indifferently. A contradiction is an opposition 
which of its own nature excludes a middle. The part of a 
contradiction which conjoins a predicate with a subject is an 
affirmation; the part disjoining them is a negation. I call an 
immediate basic truth of syllogism a ‘thesis’ when, though it is 
not susceptible of proof by the teacher, yet ignorance of it does 
not constitute a total bar to progress on the part of the pupil: 
one which the pupil must know if he is to learn anything 
whatever is an axiom. I call it an axiom because there are such 
truths and we give them the name of axioms par excellence. If a 
thesis assumes one part or the other of an enunciation, i.e. 
asserts either the existence or the non-existence of a subject, it 
is a hypothesis; if it does not so assert, it is a definition. 
Definition is a ‘thesis’ or a ‘laying something down’, since the 
arithmetician lays it down that to be a unit is to be 
quantitatively indivisible; but it is not a hypothesis, for to define 
what a unit is is not the same as to affirm its existence. 

Now since the required ground of our knowledge – i.e. of our 
conviction – of a fact is the possession of such a syllogism as we 
call demonstration, and the ground of the syllogism is the facts 
constituting its premisses, we must not only know the primary 
premisses – some if not all of them – beforehand, but know 
them better than the conclusion: for the cause of an attribute’s 
inherence in a subject always itself inheres in the subject more 
firmly than that attribute; e.g. the cause of our loving anything 
is dearer to us than the object of our love. So since the primary 
premisses are the cause of our knowledge – i.e. of our conviction 

– it follows that we know them better – that is, are more 
convinced of them – than their consequences, precisely because 
of our knowledge of the latter is the effect of our knowledge of 
the premisses. Now a man cannot believe in anything more 
than in the things he knows, unless he has either actual 
knowledge of it or something better than actual knowledge. But 
we are faced with this paradox if a student whose belief rests 

on demonstration has not prior knowledge; a man must believe 
in some, if not in all, of the basic truths more than in the 
conclusion. Moreover, if a man sets out to acquire the scientific 
knowledge that comes through demonstration, he must not 
only have a better knowledge of the basic truths and a firmer 
conviction of them than of the connexion which is being 
demonstrated: more than this, nothing must be more certain or 
better known to him than these basic truths in their character 
as contradicting the fundamental premisses which lead to the 
opposed and erroneous conclusion. For indeed the conviction of 
pure science must be unshakable. 

Some hold that, owing to the necessity of knowing the primary 
premisses, there is no scientific knowledge. Others think there 
is, but that all truths are demonstrable. Neither doctrine is 
either true or a necessary deduction from the premisses. The 
first school, assuming that there is no way of knowing other 
than by demonstration, maintain that an infinite regress is 
involved, on the ground that if behind the prior stands no 
primary, we could not know the posterior through the prior 
(wherein they are right, for one cannot traverse an infinite 
series): if on the other hand – they say – the series terminates 
and there are primary premisses, yet these are unknowable 
because incapable of demonstration, which according to them 
is the only form of knowledge. And since thus one cannot know 
the primary premisses, knowledge of the conclusions which 
follow from them is not pure scientific knowledge nor properly 
knowing at all, but rests on the mere supposition that the 
premisses are true. The other party agree with them as regards 
knowing, holding that it is only possible by demonstration, but 


they see no difficulty in holding that all truths are 
demonstrated, on the ground that demonstration may be 
circular and reciprocal. 

Our own doctrine is that not all knowledge is demonstrative: on 
the contrary, knowledge of the immediate premisses is 
independent of demonstration. (The necessity of this is obvious; 
for since we must know the prior premisses from which the 
demonstration is drawn, and since the regress must end in 
immediate truths, those truths must be indemonstrable.) Such, 
then, is our doctrine, and in addition we maintain that besides 
scientific knowledge there is its originative source which 
enables us to recognize the definitions. 

Now demonstration must be based on premisses prior to and 
better known than the conclusion; and the same things cannot 
simultaneously be both prior and posterior to one another: so 
circular demonstration is clearly not possible in the unqualified 
sense of ‘demonstration’, but only possible if ‘demonstration’ be 
extended to include that other method of argument which rests 
on a distinction between truths prior to us and truths without 
qualification prior, i.e. the method by which induction produces 
knowledge. But if we accept this extension of its meaning, our 
definition of unqualified knowledge will prove faulty; for there 
seem to be two kinds of it. Perhaps, however, the second form of 
demonstration, that which proceeds from truths better known 
to us, is not demonstration in the unqualified sense of the term. 

The advocates of circular demonstration are not only faced with 
the difficulty we have just stated: in addition their theory 
reduces to the mere statement that if a thing exists, then it does 
exist – an easy way of proving anything. That this is so can be 
clearly shown by taking three terms, for to constitute the circle 
it makes no difference whether many terms or few or even only 
two are taken. Thus by direct proof, if A is, B must be; if B is, C 


must be; therefore if A is, C must be. Since then – by the circular 
proof – if A is, B must be, and if B is,A must be,A may be 
substituted for C above. Then ‘if B is, A must be’=‘if B is, C must 
be’, which above gave the conclusion ‘if A is, C must be’: but C 
and A have been identified. Consequently the upholders of 
circular demonstration are in the position of saying that if A is, 
A must be – a simple way of proving anything. Moreover, even 
such circular demonstration is impossible except in the case of 
attributes that imply one another, viz. ‘peculiar’ properties. 

Now, it has been shown that the positing of one thing – be it one 
term or one premiss – never involves a necessary consequent: 
two premisses constitute the first and smallest foundation for 
drawing a conclusion at all and therefore a fortiori for the 
demonstrative syllogism of science. If, then, A is implied in B 
and C, and B and C are reciprocally implied in one another and 
in A, it is possible, as has been shown in my writings on the 
syllogism, to prove all the assumptions on which the original 
conclusion rested, by circular demonstration in the first figure. 
But it has also been shown that in the other figures either no 
conclusion is possible, or at least none which proves both the 
original premisses. Propositions the terms of which are not 
convertible cannot be circularly demonstrated at all, and since 
convertible terms occur rarely in actual demonstrations, it is 
clearly frivolous and impossible to say that demonstration is 
reciprocal and that therefore everything can be demonstrated. 

Since the object of pure scientific knowledge cannot be other 
than it is, the truth obtained by demonstrative knowledge will 
be necessary. And since demonstrative knowledge is only 



present when we have a demonstration, it follows that 
demonstration is an inference from necessary premisses. So we 
must consider what are the premisses of demonstration – i.e. 
what is their character: and as a preliminary, let us define what 
we mean by an attribute ‘true in every instance of its subject’, 
an ‘essential’ attribute, and a ‘commensurate and universal’ 
attribute. I call ‘true in every instance’ what is truly predicable 
of all instances – not of one to the exclusion of others – and at 
all times, not at this or that time only; e.g. if animal is truly 
predicable of every instance of man, then if it be true to say ‘this 
is a man’, ‘this is an animal’ is also true, and if the one be true 
now the other is true now. A corresponding account holds if 
point is in every instance predicable as contained in line. There 
is evidence for this in the fact that the objection we raise 
against a proposition put to us as true in every instance is either 
an instance in which, or an occasion on which, it is not true. 
Essential attributes are (1) such as belong to their subject as 
elements in its essential nature (e.g. line thus belongs to 
triangle, point to line; for the very being or ‘substance’ of 
triangle and line is composed of these elements, which are 
contained in the formulae defining triangle and line): (2) such 
that, while they belong to certain subjects, the subjects to which 
they belong are contained in the attribute’s own defining 
formula. Thus straight and curved belong to line, odd and even, 
prime and compound, square and oblong, to number; and also 
the formula defining any one of these attributes contains its 
subject – e.g. line or number as the case may be. 

Extending this classification to all other attributes, I distinguish 
those that answer the above description as belonging 
essentially to their respective subjects; whereas attributes 
related in neither of these two ways to their subjects I call 
accidents or ‘coincidents’; e.g. musical or white is a ‘coincident’ 
of animal. 


Further (a) that is essential which is not predicated of a subject 
other than itself: e.g. ‘the walking [thing]’ walks and is white in 
virtue of being something else besides; whereas substance, in 
the sense of whatever signifies a ‘this somewhat’, is not what it 
is in virtue of being something else besides. Things, then, not 
predicated of a subject I call essential; things predicated of a 
subject I call accidental or ‘coincidental’. 

In another sense again (b) a thing consequentially connected 
with anything is essential; one not so connected is 
‘coincidental’. An example of the latter is ‘While he was walking 
it lightened’: the lightning was not due to his walking; it was, 
we should say, a coincidence. If, on the other hand, there is a 
consequential connexion, the predication is essential; e.g. if a 
beast dies when its throat is being cut, then its death is also 
essentially connected with the cutting, because the cutting was 
the cause of death, not death a ‘coincident’ of the cutting. 

So far then as concerns the sphere of connexions scientifically 
known in the unqualified sense of that term, all attributes 
which (within that sphere) are essential either in the sense that 
their subjects are contained in them, or in the sense that they 
are contained in their subjects, are necessary as well as 
consequentially connected with their subjects. For it is 
impossible for them not to inhere in their subjects either simply 
or in the qualified sense that one or other of a pair of opposites 
must inhere in the subject; e.g. in line must be either 
straightness or curvature, in number either oddness or 
evenness. For within a single identical genus the contrary of a 
given attribute is either its privative or its contradictory; e.g. 
within number what is not odd is even, inasmuch as within this 
sphere even is a necessary consequent of not-odd. So, since any 
given predicate must be either affirmed or denied of any 
subject, essential attributes must inhere in their subjects of 
necessity. 


Thus, then, we have established the distinction between the 
attribute which is ‘true in every instance’ and the ‘essential’ 
attribute. 

I term ‘commensurately universal’ an attribute which belongs to 
every instance of its subject, and to every instance essentially 
and as such; from which it clearly follows that all 
commensurate universals inhere necessarily in their subjects. 
The essential attribute, and the attribute that belongs to its 
subject as such, are identical. E.g. point and straight belong to 
line essentially, for they belong to line as such; and triangle as 
such has two right angles, for it is essentially equal to two right 
angles. 

An attribute belongs commensurately and universally to a 
subject when it can be shown to belong to any random instance 
of that subject and when the subject is the first thing to which 
it can be shown to belong. Thus, e.g. (1) the equality of its angles 
to two right angles is not a commensurately universal attribute 
of figure. For though it is possible to show that a figure has its 
angles equal to two right angles, this attribute cannot be 
demonstrated of any figure selected at haphazard, nor in 
demonstrating does one take a figure at random – a square is a 
figure but its angles are not equal to two right angles. On the 
other hand, any isosceles triangle has its angles equal to two 
right angles, yet isosceles triangle is not the primary subject of 
this attribute but triangle is prior. So whatever can be shown to 
have its angles equal to two right angles, or to possess any other 
attribute, in any random instance of itself and primarily – that is 
the first subject to which the predicate in question belongs 
commensurately and universally, and the demonstration, in the 
essential sense, of any predicate is the proof of it as belonging 
to this first subject commensurately and universally: while the 
proof of it as belonging to the other subjects to which it 
attaches is demonstration only in a secondary and unessential 


sense. Nor again (2) is equality to two right angles a 
commensurately universal attribute of isosceles; it is of wider 
application. 

We must not fail to observe that we often fall into error because 
our conclusion is not in fact primary and commensurately 
universal in the sense in which we think we prove it so. We 
make this mistake (1) when the subject is an individual or 
individuals above which there is no universal to be found: (2) 
when the subjects belong to different species and there is a 
higher universal, but it has no name: (3) when the subject which 
the demonstrator takes as a whole is really only a part of a 
larger whole; for then the demonstration will be true of the 
individual instances within the part and will hold in every 
instance of it, yet the demonstration will not be true of this 
subject primarily and commensurately and universally. When a 
demonstration is true of a subject primarily and 
commensurately and universally, that is to be taken to mean 
that it is true of a given subject primarily and as such. Case (3) 
may be thus exemplified. If a proof were given that 
perpendiculars to the same line are parallel, it might be 
supposed that lines thus perpendicular were the proper subject 
of the demonstration because being parallel is true of every 
instance of them. But it is not so, for the parallelism depends 
not on these angles being equal to one another because each is 
a right angle, but simply on their being equal to one another. An 
example of (1) would be as follows: if isosceles were the only 
triangle, it would be thought to have its angles equal to two 
right angles qua isosceles. An instance of (2) would be the law 
that proportionals alternate. Alternation used to be 


demonstrated separately of numbers, lines, solids, and 
durations, though it could have been proved of them all by a 
single demonstration. Because there was no single name to 
denote that in which numbers, lengths, durations, and solids 
are identical, and because they differed specifically from one 
another, this property was proved of each of them separately. 
To-day, however, the proof is commensurately universal, for 
they do not possess this attribute qua lines or qua numbers, but 
qua manifesting this generic character which they are 
postulated as possessing universally. Hence, even if one prove of 
each kind of triangle that its angles are equal to two right 
angles, whether by means of the same or different proofs; still, 
as long as one treats separately equilateral, scalene, and 
isosceles, one does not yet know, except sophistically, that 
triangle has its angles equal to two right angles, nor does one 
yet know that triangle has this property commensurately and 
universally, even if there is no other species of triangle but 
these. For one does not know that triangle as such has this 
property, nor even that ‘all’ triangles have it – unless ‘all’ means 
‘each taken singly’: if ‘all’ means ‘as a whole class’, then, though 
there be none in which one does not recognize this property, 
one does not know it of ‘all triangles’. 

When, then, does our knowledge fail of commensurate 
universality, and when it is unqualified knowledge? If triangle 
be identical in essence with equilateral, i.e. with each or all 
equilaterals, then clearly we have unqualified knowledge: if on 
the other hand it be not, and the attribute belongs to equilateral 
qua triangle; then our knowledge fails of commensurate 
universality. ‘But’, it will be asked, ‘does this attribute belong to 
the subject of which it has been demonstrated qua triangle or 
qua isosceles? What is the point at which the subject. to which 
it belongs is primary? (i.e. to what subject can it be 
demonstrated as belonging commensurately and universally?)’ 
Clearly this point is the first term in which it is found to inhere 


as the elimination of inferior differentiae proceeds. Thus the 
angles of a brazen isosceles triangle are equal to two right 
angles: but eliminate brazen and isosceles and the attribute 
remains. ‘But’ – you may say – ’eliminate figure or limit, and the 
attribute vanishes.’ True, but figure and limit are not the first 
differentiae whose elimination destroys the attribute. ‘Then 
what is the first?’ If it is triangle, it will be in virtue of triangle 
that the attribute belongs to all the other subjects of which it is 
predicable, and triangle is the subject to which it can be 
demonstrated as belonging commensurately and universally. 

Demonstrative knowledge must rest on necessary basic truths; 
for the object of scientific knowledge cannot be other than it is. 
Now attributes attaching essentially to their subjects attach 
necessarily to them: for essential attributes are either elements 
in the essential nature of their subjects, or contain their 
subjects as elements in their own essential nature. (The pairs of 
opposites which the latter class includes are necessary because 
one member or the other necessarily inheres.) It follows from 
this that premisses of the demonstrative syllogism must be 
connexions essential in the sense explained: for all attributes 
must inhere essentially or else be accidental, and accidental 
attributes are not necessary to their subjects. 

We must either state the case thus, or else premise that the 
conclusion of demonstration is necessary and that a 
demonstrated conclusion cannot be other than it is, and then 
infer that the conclusion must be developed from necessary 
premisses. For though you may reason from true premisses 
without demonstrating, yet if your premisses are necessary you 


will assuredly demonstrate – in such necessity you have at once 
a distinctive character of demonstration. That demonstration 
proceeds from necessary premisses is also indicated by the fact 
that the objection we raise against a professed demonstration is 
that a premiss of it is not a necessary truth – whether we think 
it altogether devoid of necessity, or at any rate so far as our 
opponent’s previous argument goes. This shows how naive it is 
to suppose one’s basic truths rightly chosen if one starts with a 
proposition which is (1) popularly accepted and (2) true, such as 
the sophists’ assumption that to know is the same as to possess 
knowledge. For (1) popular acceptance or rejection is no 
criterion of a basic truth, which can only be the primary law of 
the genus constituting the subject matter of the demonstration; 
and (2) not all truth is ‘appropriate’. 

A further proof that the conclusion must be the development of 
necessary premisses is as follows. Where demonstration is 
possible, one who can give no account which includes the cause 
has no scientific knowledge. If, then, we suppose a syllogism in 
which, though A necessarily inheres in C, yet B, the middle term 
of the demonstration, is not necessarily connected with A and 
C, then the man who argues thus has no reasoned knowledge of 
the conclusion, since this conclusion does not owe its necessity 
to the middle term; for though the conclusion is necessary, the 
mediating link is a contingent fact. Or again, if a man is without 
knowledge now, though he still retains the steps of the 
argument, though there is no change in himself or in the fact 
and no lapse of memory on his part; then neither had he 
knowledge previously. But the mediating link, not being 
necessary, may have perished in the interval; and if so, though 
there be no change in him nor in the fact, and though he will 
still retain the steps of the argument, yet he has not knowledge, 
and therefore had not knowledge before. Even if the link has not 
actually perished but is liable to perish, this situation is possible 
and might occur. But such a condition cannot be knowledge. 


When the conclusion is necessary, the middle through which it 
was proved may yet quite easily be non-necessary. You can in 
fact infer the necessary even from a non-necessary premiss, 
just as you can infer the true from the not true. On the other 
hand, when the middle is necessary the conclusion must be 
necessary; just as true premisses always give a true conclusion. 
Thus, if A is necessarily predicated of B and B of C, then A is 
necessarily predicated of C. But when the conclusion is 
nonnecessary the middle cannot be necessary either. Thus: let A 
be predicated non-necessarily of C but necessarily of B, and let B 
be a necessary predicate of C; then A too will be a necessary 
predicate of C, which by hypothesis it is not. 

To sum up, then: demonstrative knowledge must be knowledge 
of a necessary nexus, and therefore must clearly be obtained 
through a necessary middle term; otherwise its possessor will 
know neither the cause nor the fact that his conclusion is a 
necessary connexion. Either he will mistake the non-necessary 
for the necessary and believe the necessity of the conclusion 
without knowing it, or else he will not even believe it – in which 
case he will be equally ignorant, whether he actually infers the 
mere fact through middle terms or the reasoned fact and from 
immediate premisses. 

Of accidents that are not essential according to our definition of 
essential there is no demonstrative knowledge; for since an 
accident, in the sense in which I here speak of it, may also not 
inhere, it is impossible to prove its inherence as a necessary 
conclusion. A difficulty, however, might be raised as to why in 
dialectic, if the conclusion is not a necessary connexion, such 
and such determinate premisses should be proposed in order to 
deal with such and such determinate problems. Would not the 
result be the same if one asked any questions whatever and 
then merely stated one’s conclusion? The solution is that 
determinate questions have to be put, not because the replies to 


them affirm facts which necessitate facts affirmed by the 
conclusion, but because these answers are propositions which if 
the answerer affirm, he must affirm the conclusion and affirm 
it with truth if they are true. 

Since it is just those attributes within every genus which are 
essential and possessed by their respective subjects as such 
that are necessary it is clear that both the conclusions and the 
premisses of demonstrations which produce scientific 
knowledge are essential. For accidents are not necessary: and, 
further, since accidents are not necessary one does not 
necessarily have reasoned knowledge of a conclusion drawn 
from them (this is so even if the accidental premisses are 
invariable but not essential, as in proofs through signs; for 
though the conclusion be actually essential, one will not know 
it as essential nor know its reason); but to have reasoned 
knowledge of a conclusion is to know it through its cause. We 
may conclude that the middle must be consequentially 
connected with the minor, and the major with the middle. 

It follows that we cannot in demonstrating pass from one genus 
to another. We cannot, for instance, prove geometrical truths by 
arithmetic. For there are three elements in demonstration: (1) 
what is proved, the conclusion – an attribute inhering 
essentially in a genus; (2) the axioms, i.e. axioms which are 
premisses of demonstration; (3) the subject – genus whose 
attributes, i.e. essential properties, are revealed by the 
demonstration. The axioms which are premisses of 
demonstration may be identical in two or more sciences: but in 
the case of two different genera such as arithmetic and 


geometry you cannot apply arithmetical demonstration to the 
properties of magnitudes unless the magnitudes in question are 
numbers. How in certain cases transference is possible I will 
explain later. 

Arithmetical demonstration and the other sciences likewise 
possess, each of them, their own genera; so that if the 
demonstration is to pass from one sphere to another, the genus 
must be either absolutely or to some extent the same. If this is 
not so, transference is clearly impossible, because the extreme 
and the middle terms must be drawn from the same genus: 
otherwise, as predicated, they will not be essential and will thus 
be accidents. That is why it cannot be proved by geometry that 
opposites fall under one science, nor even that the product of 
two cubes is a cube. Nor can the theorem of any one science be 
demonstrated by means of another science, unless these 
theorems are related as subordinate to superior (e.g. as optical 
theorems to geometry or harmonic theorems to arithmetic). 
Geometry again cannot prove of lines any property which they 
do not possess qua lines, i.e. in virtue of the fundamental truths 
of their peculiar genus: it cannot show, for example, that the 
straight line is the most beautiful of lines or the contrary of the 
circle; for these qualities do not belong to lines in virtue of their 
peculiar genus, but through some property which it shares with 
other genera. 

It is also clear that if the premisses from which the syllogism 
proceeds are commensurately universal, the conclusion of such 

i.e. in the unqualified sense – must also be eternal. Therefore no 
attribute can be demonstrated nor known by strictly scientific 

knowledge to inhere in perishable things. The proof can only be 
accidental, because the attribute’s connexion with its perishable 
subject is not commensurately universal but temporary and 
special. If such a demonstration is made, one premiss must be 
perishable and not commensurately universal (perishable 
because only if it is perishable will the conclusion be perishable; 
not commensurately universal, because the predicate will be 
predicable of some instances of the subject and not of others); 
so that the conclusion can only be that a fact is true at the 
moment – not commensurately and universally. The same is 
true of definitions, since a definition is either a primary premiss 
or a conclusion of a demonstration, or else only differs from a 
demonstration in the order of its terms. Demonstration and 
science of merely frequent occurrences – e.g. of eclipse as 
happening to the moon – are, as such, clearly eternal: whereas 
so far as they are not eternal they are not fully commensurate. 
Other subjects too have properties attaching to them in the 
same way as eclipse attaches to the moon. 

It is clear that if the conclusion is to show an attribute inhering 
as such, nothing can be demonstrated except from its 
‘appropriate’ basic truths. Consequently a proof even from true, 
indemonstrable, and immediate premisses does not constitute 
knowledge. Such proofs are like Bryson’s method of squaring 
the circle; for they operate by taking as their middle a common 
character – a character, therefore, which the subject may share 
with another – and consequently they apply equally to subjects 
different in kind. They therefore afford knowledge of an 
attribute only as inhering accidentally, not as belonging to its 


subject as such: otherwise they would not have been applicable 
to another genus. 

Our knowledge of any attribute’s connexion with a subject is 
accidental unless we know that connexion through the middle 
term in virtue of which it inheres, and as an inference from 
basic premisses essential and ‘appropriate’ to the subject – 
unless we know, e.g. the property of possessing angles equal to 
two right angles as belonging to that subject in which it inheres 
essentially, and as inferred from basic premisses essential and 
‘appropriate’ to that subject: so that if that middle term also 
belongs essentially to the minor, the middle must belong to the 
same kind as the major and minor terms. The only exceptions 
to this rule are such cases as theorems in harmonics which are 
demonstrable by arithmetic. Such theorems are proved by the 
same middle terms as arithmetical properties, but with a 
qualification – the fact falls under a separate science (for the 
subject genus is separate), but the reasoned fact concerns the 
superior science, to which the attributes essentially belong. 
Thus, even these apparent exceptions show that no attribute is 
strictly demonstrable except from its ‘appropriate’ basic truths, 
which, however, in the case of these sciences have the requisite 
identity of character. 

It is no less evident that the peculiar basic truths of each 
inhering attribute are indemonstrable; for basic truths from 
which they might be deduced would be basic truths of all that 
is, and the science to which they belonged would possess 
universal sovereignty. This is so because he knows better whose 
knowledge is deduced from higher causes, for his knowledge is 
from prior premisses when it derives from causes themselves 
uncaused: hence, if he knows better than others or best of all, 
his knowledge would be science in a higher or the highest 
degree. But, as things are, demonstration is not transferable to 
another genus, with such exceptions as we have mentioned of 


the application of geometrical demonstrations to theorems in 
mechanics or optics, or of arithmetical demonstrations to those 
of harmonics. 

It is hard to be sure whether one knows or not; for it is hard to 
be sure whether one’s knowledge is based on the basic truths 
appropriate to each attribute – the differentia of true knowledge. 
We think we have scientific knowledge if we have reasoned 
from true and primary premisses. But that is not so: the 
conclusion must be homogeneous with the basic facts of the 
science. 

I call the basic truths of every genus those clements in it the 
existence of which cannot be proved. As regards both these 
primary truths and the attributes dependent on them the 
meaning of the name is assumed. The fact of their existence as 
regards the primary truths must be assumed; but it has to be 
proved of the remainder, the attributes. Thus we assume the 
meaning alike of unity, straight, and triangular; but while as 
regards unity and magnitude we assume also the fact of their 
existence, in the case of the remainder proof is required. 

Of the basic truths used in the demonstrative sciences some are 
peculiar to each science, and some are common, but common 
only in the sense of analogous, being of use only in so far as 
they fall within the genus constituting the province of the 
science in question. 

Peculiar truths are, e.g. the definitions of line and straight; 
common truths are such as ‘take equals from equals and equals 
remain’. Only so much of these common truths is required as 


falls within the genus in question: for a truth of this kind will 
have the same force even if not used generally but applied by 
the geometer only to magnitudes, or by the arithmetician only 
to numbers. Also peculiar to a science are the subjects the 
existence as well as the meaning of which it assumes, and the 
essential attributes of which it investigates, e.g. in arithmetic 
units, in geometry points and lines. Both the existence and the 
meaning of the subjects are assumed by these sciences; but of 
their essential attributes only the meaning is assumed. For 
example arithmetic assumes the meaning of odd and even, 
square and cube, geometry that of incommensurable, or of 
deflection or verging of lines, whereas the existence of these 
attributes is demonstrated by means of the axioms and from 
previous conclusions as premisses. Astronomy too proceeds in 
the same way. For indeed every demonstrative science has three 
elements: (1) that which it posits, the subject genus whose 
essential attributes it examines; (2) the so-called axioms, which 
are primary premisses of its demonstration; (3) the attributes, 
the meaning of which it assumes. Yet some sciences may very 
well pass over some of these elements; e.g. we might not 
expressly posit the existence of the genus if its existence were 
obvious (for instance, the existence of hot and cold is more 
evident than that of number); or we might omit to assume 
expressly the meaning of the attributes if it were well 
understood. In the way the meaning of axioms, such as ‘Take 
equals from equals and equals remain’, is well known and so 
not expressly assumed. Nevertheless in the nature of the case 
the essential elements of demonstration are three: the subject, 
the attributes, and the basic premisses. 

That which expresses necessary self-grounded fact, and which 
we must necessarily believe, is distinct both from the 
hypotheses of a science and from illegitimate postulate – I say 
‘must believe’, because all syllogism, and therefore a fortiori 
demonstration, is addressed not to the spoken word, but to the 


discourse within the soul, and though we can always raise 
objections to the spoken word, to the inward discourse we 
cannot always object. That which is capable of proof but 
assumed by the teacher without proof is, if the pupil believes 
and accepts it, hypothesis, though only in a limited sense 
hypothesis – that is, relatively to the pupil; if the pupil has no 
opinion or a contrary opinion on the matter, the same 
assumption is an illegitimate postulate. Therein lies the 
distinction between hypothesis and illegitimate postulate: the 
latter is the contrary of the pupil’s opinion, demonstrable, but 
assumed and used without demonstration. 

The definition – viz. those which are not expressed as 
statements that anything is or is not – are not hypotheses: but it 
is in the premisses of a science that its hypotheses are 
contained. Definitions require only to be understood, and this is 
not hypothesis – unless it be contended that the pupil’s hearing 
is also an hypothesis required by the teacher. Hypotheses, on 
the contrary, postulate facts on the being of which depends the 
being of the fact inferred. Nor are the geometer’s hypotheses 
false, as some have held, urging that one must not employ 
falsehood and that the geometer is uttering falsehood in stating 
that the line which he draws is a foot long or straight, when it is 
actually neither. The truth is that the geometer does not draw 
any conclusion from the being of the particular line of which he 
speaks, but from what his diagrams symbolize. A further 
distinction is that all hypotheses and illegitimate postulates are 
either universal or particular, whereas a definition is neither. 


So demonstration does not necessarily imply the being of Forms 
nor a One beside a Many, but it does necessarily imply the 
possibility of truly predicating one of many; since without this 
possibility we cannot save the universal, and if the universal 
goes, the middle term goes witb. it, and so demonstration 
becomes impossible. We conclude, then, that there must be a 
single identical term unequivocally predicable of a number of 
individuals. 

The law that it is impossible to affirm and deny simultaneously 
the same predicate of the same subject is not expressly posited 
by any demonstration except when the conclusion also has to 
be expressed in that form; in which case the proof lays down as 
its major premiss that the major is truly affirmed of the middle 
but falsely denied. It makes no difference, however, if we add to 
the middle, or again to the minor term, the corresponding 
negative. For grant a minor term of which it is true to predicate 
man – even if it be also true to predicate not-man of it – still 
grant simply that man is animal and not not-animal, and the 
conclusion follows: for it will still be true to say that Callias – 
even if it be also true to say that not-Callias – is animal and not 
not-animal. The reason is that the major term is predicable not 
only of the middle, but of something other than the middle as 
well, being of wider application; so that the conclusion is not 
affected even if the middle is extended to cover the original 
middle term and also what is not the original middle term. 

The law that every predicate can be either truly affirmed or 
truly denied of every subject is posited by such demonstration 
as uses reductio ad impossibile, and then not always 
universally, but so far as it is requisite; within the limits, that is, 
of the genus – the genus, I mean (as I have already explained), to 
which the man of science applies his demonstrations. In virtue 


of the common elements of demonstration – I mean the 
common axioms which are used as premisses of 
demonstration, not the subjects nor the attributes 
demonstrated as belonging to them – all the sciences have 
communion with one another, and in communion with them all 
is dialectic and any science which might attempt a universal 
proof of axioms such as the law of excluded middle, the law 
that the subtraction of equals from equals leaves equal 
remainders, or other axioms of the same kind. Dialectic has no 
definite sphere of this kind, not being confined to a single 
genus. Otherwise its method would not be interrogative; for the 
interrogative method is barred to the demonstrator, who cannot 
use the opposite facts to prove the same nexus. This was shown 
in my work on the syllogism. 

If a syllogistic question is equivalent to a proposition 
embodying one of the two sides of a contradiction, and if each 
science has its peculiar propositions from which its peculiar 
conclusion is developed, then there is such a thing as a 
distinctively scientific question, and it is the interrogative form 
of the premisses from which the ‘appropriate’ conclusion of 
each science is developed. Hence it is clear that not every 
question will be relevant to geometry, nor to medicine, nor to 
any other science: only those questions will be geometrical 
which form premisses for the proof of the theorems of 
geometry or of any other science, such as optics, which uses the 
same basic truths as geometry. Of the other sciences the like is 
true. Of these questions the geometer is bound to give his 
account, using the basic truths of geometry in conjunction with 
his previous conclusions; of the basic truths the geometer, as 


such, is not bound to give any account. The like is true of the 
other sciences. There is a limit, then, to the questions which we 
may put to each man of science; nor is each man of science 
bound to answer all inquiries on each several subject, but only 
such as fall within the defined field of his own science. If, then, 
in controversy with a geometer qua geometer the disputant 
confines himself to geometry and proves anything from 
geometrical premisses, he is clearly to be applauded; if he goes 
outside these he will be at fault, and obviously cannot even 
refute the geometer except accidentally. One should therefore 
not discuss geometry among those who are not geometers, for 
in such a company an unsound argument will pass unnoticed. 
This is correspondingly true in the other sciences. 

Since there are ‘geometrical’ questions, does it follow that there 
are also distinctively ‘ungeometrical’ questions? Further, in each 
special science – geometry for instance – what kind of error is it 
that may vitiate questions, and yet not exclude them from that 
science? Again, is the erroneous conclusion one constructed 
from premisses opposite to the true premisses, or is it formal 
fallacy though drawn from geometrical premisses? Or, perhaps, 
the erroneous conclusion is due to the drawing of premisses 
from another science; e.g. in a geometrical controversy a 
musical question is distinctively ungeometrical, whereas the 
notion that parallels meet is in one sense geometrical, being 
ungeometrical in a different fashion: the reason being that 
‘ungeometrical’, like ‘unrhythmical’, is equivocal, meaning in 
the one case not geometry at all, in the other bad geometry? It 
is this error, i.e. error based on premisses of this kind – ‘of’ the 
science but false – that is the contrary of science. In 
mathematics the formal fallacy is not so common, because it is 
the middle term in which the ambiguity lies, since the major is 
predicated of the whole of the middle and the middle of the 
whole of the minor (the predicate of course never has the prefix 
‘all’); and in mathematics one can, so to speak, see these middle 


terms with an intellectual vision, while in dialectic the 
ambiguity may escape detection. E.g. ‘Is every circle a figure?’ A 
diagram shows that this is so, but the minor premiss ‘Are epics 
circles?’ is shown by the diagram to be false. 

If a proof has an inductive minor premiss, one should not bring 
an ‘objection’ against it. For since every premiss must be 
applicable to a number of cases (otherwise it will not be true in 
every instance, which, since the syllogism proceeds from 
universals, it must be), then assuredly the same is true of an 
‘objection’; since premisses and ‘objections’ are so far the same 
that anything which can be validly advanced as an ‘objection’ 
must be such that it could take the form of a premiss, either 
demonstrative or dialectical. On the other hand, arguments 
formally illogical do sometimes occur through taking as 
middles mere attributes of the major and minor terms. An 
instance of this is Caeneus’ proof that fire increases in 
geometrical proportion: ‘Fire’, he argues, ‘increases rapidly, and 
so does geometrical proportion’. There is no syllogism so, but 
there is a syllogism if the most rapidly increasing proportion is 
geometrical and the most rapidly increasing proportion is 
attributable to fire in its motion. Sometimes, no doubt, it is 
impossible to reason from premisses predicating mere 
attributes: but sometimes it is possible, though the possibility is 
overlooked. If false premisses could never give true conclusions 
‘resolution’ would be easy, for premisses and conclusion would 
in that case inevitably reciprocate. I might then argue thus: let A 
be an existing fact; let the existence of A imply such and such 
facts actually known to me to exist, which we may call B. I can 
now, since they reciprocate, infer A from B. 

Reciprocation of premisses and conclusion is more frequent in 
mathematics, because mathematics takes definitions, but never 
an accident, for its premisses – a second characteristic 


distinguishing mathematical reasoning from dialectical 
disputations. 

A science expands not by the interposition of fresh middle 
terms, but by the apposition of fresh extreme terms. E.g. A is 
predicated of B, B of C, C of D, and so indefinitely. Or the 
expansion may be lateral: e.g. one major A, may be proved of 
two minors, C and E. Thus let A represent number – a number or 
number taken indeterminately; B determinate odd number; C 
any particular odd number. We can then predicate A of C. Next 
let D represent determinate even number, and E even number. 
Then A is predicable of E. 

Knowledge of the fact differs from knowledge of the reasoned 
fact. To begin with, they differ within the same science and in 
two ways: (1) when the premisses of the syllogism are not 
immediate (for then the proximate cause is not contained in 
them – a necessary condition of knowledge of the reasoned 
fact): (2) when the premisses are immediate, but instead of the 
cause the better known of the two reciprocals is taken as the 
middle; for of two reciprocally predicable terms the one which 
is not the cause may quite easily be the better known and so 
become the middle term of the demonstration. Thus (2) (a) you 
might prove as follows that the planets are near because they 
do not twinkle: let C be the planets, B not twinkling, A 
proximity. Then B is predicable of C; for the planets do not 
twinkle. But A is also predicable of B, since that which does not 
twinkle is near – we must take this truth as having been 
reached by induction or sense-perception. Therefore A is a 
necessary predicate of C; so that we have demonstrated that the 


planets are near. This syllogism, then, proves not the reasoned 
fact but only the fact; since they are not near because they do 
not twinkle, but, because they are near, do not twinkle. The 
major and middle of the proof, however, may be reversed, and 
then the demonstration will be of the reasoned fact. Thus: let C 
be the planets, B proximity, A not twinkling. Then B is an 
attribute of C, and A – not twinkling – of B. Consequently A is 
predicable of C, and the syllogism proves the reasoned fact, 
since its middle term is the proximate cause. Another example 
is the inference that the moon is spherical from its manner of 
waxing. Thus: since that which so waxes is spherical, and since 
the moon so waxes, clearly the moon is spherical. Put in this 
form, the syllogism turns out to be proof of the fact, but if the 
middle and major be reversed it is proof of the reasoned fact; 
since the moon is not spherical because it waxes in a certain 
manner, but waxes in such a manner because it is spherical. 
(Let C be the moon, B spherical, and A waxing.) Again (b), in 
cases where the cause and the effect are not reciprocal and the 
effect is the better known, the fact is demonstrated but not the 
reasoned fact. This also occurs (1) when the middle falls outside 
the major and minor, for here too the strict cause is not given, 
and so the demonstration is of the fact, not of the reasoned fact. 
For example, the question ‘Why does not a wall breathe?’ might 
be answered, ‘Because it is not an animal’; but that answer 
would not give the strict cause, because if not being an animal 
causes the absence of respiration, then being an animal should 
be the cause of respiration, according to the rule that if the 
negation of causes the non-inherence of y, the affirmation of x 
causes the inherence of y; e.g. if the disproportion of the hot 
and cold elements is the cause of ill health, their proportion is 
the cause of health; and conversely, if the assertion of x causes 
the inherence of y, the negation of x must cause y’s non-
inherence. But in the case given this consequence does not 
result; for not every animal breathes. A syllogism with this kind 


of cause takes place in the second figure. Thus: let A be animal, 
B respiration, C wall. Then A is predicable of all B (for all that 
breathes is animal), but of no C; and consequently B is 
predicable of no C; that is, the wall does not breathe. Such 
causes are like far-fetched explanations, which precisely consist 
in making the cause too remote, as in Anacharsis’ account of 
why the Scythians have no flute-players; namely because they 
have no vines. 

Thus, then, do the syllogism of the fact and the syllogism of the 
reasoned fact differ within one science and according to the 
position of the middle terms. But there is another way too in 
which the fact and the reasoned fact differ, and that is when 
they are investigated respectively by different sciences. This 
occurs in the case of problems related to one another as 
subordinate and superior, as when optical problems are 
subordinated to geometry, mechanical problems to stereometry, 
harmonic problems to arithmetic, the data of observation to 
astronomy. (Some of these sciences bear almost the same 
name; e.g. mathematical and nautical astronomy, mathematical 
and acoustical harmonics.) Here it is the business of the 
empirical observers to know the fact, of the mathematicians to 
know the reasoned fact; for the latter are in possession of the 
demonstrations giving the causes, and are often ignorant of the 
fact: just as we have often a clear insight into a universal, but 
through lack of observation are ignorant of some of its 
particular instances. These connexions have a perceptible 
existence though they are manifestations of forms. For the 
mathematical sciences concern forms: they do not demonstrate 
properties of a substratum, since, even though the geometrical 
subjects are predicable as properties of a perceptible 
substratum, it is not as thus predicable that the mathematician 
demonstrates properties of them. As optics is related to 
geometry, so another science is related to optics, namely the 
theory of the rainbow. Here knowledge of the fact is within the 


province of the natural philosopher, knowledge of the reasoned 
fact within that of the optician, either qua optician or qua 
mathematical optician. Many sciences not standing in this 
mutual relation enter into it at points; e.g. medicine and 
geometry: it is the physician’s business to know that circular 
wounds heal more slowly, the geometer’s to know the reason 
why. 

Of all the figures the most scientific is the first. Thus, it is the 
vehicle of the demonstrations of all the mathematical sciences, 
such as arithmetic, geometry, and optics, and practically all of 
all sciences that investigate causes: for the syllogism of the 
reasoned fact is either exclusively or generally speaking and in 
most cases in this figure – a second proof that this figure is the 
most scientific; for grasp of a reasoned conclusion is the 
primary condition of knowledge. Thirdly, the first is the only 
figure which enables us to pursue knowledge of the essence of a 
thing. In the second figure no affirmative conclusion is possible, 
and knowledge of a thing’s essence must be affirmative; while 
in the third figure the conclusion can be affirmative, but cannot 
be universal, and essence must have a universal character: e.g. 
man is not two-footed animal in any qualified sense, but 
universally. Finally, the first figure has no need of the others, 
while it is by means of the first that the other two figures are 
developed, and have their intervals closepacked until 
immediate premisses are reached. 

Clearly, therefore, the first figure is the primary condition of 
knowledge. 


Just as an attribute A may (as we saw) be atomically connected 
with a subject B, so its disconnexion may be atomic. I call 
‘atomic’ connexions or disconnexions which involve no 
intermediate term; since in that case the connexion or 
disconnexion will not be mediated by something other than the 
terms themselves. It follows that if either A or B, or both A and 
B, have a genus, their disconnexion cannot be primary. Thus: let 
C be the genus of A. Then, if C is not the genus of B – for A may 
well have a genus which is not the genus of B – there will be a 
syllogism proving A’s disconnexion from B thus: 

all A is C, 

no B is C, 

therefore no B is A. 

Or if it is B which has a genus D, we have 

all B is D, 

no D is A, 

therefore no B is A, by syllogism; 

and the proof will be similar if both A and B have a genus. That 
the genus of A need not be the genus of B and vice versa, is 
shown by the existence of mutually exclusive coordinate series 
of predication. If no term in the series ACD... is predicable of any 
term in the series BEF..., and if G – a term in the former series – 
is the genus of A, clearly G will not be the genus of B; since, if it 
were, the series would not be mutually exclusive. So also if B 
has a genus, it will not be the genus of A. If, on the other hand, 
neither A nor B has a genus and A does not inhere in B, this 


disconnexion must be atomic. If there be a middle term, one or 
other of them is bound to have a genus, for the syllogism will be 
either in the first or the second figure. If it is in the first, B will 
have a genus – for the premiss containing it must be 
affirmative: if in the second, either A or B indifferently, since 
syllogism is possible if either is contained in a negative premiss, 
but not if both premisses are negative. 

Hence it is clear that one thing may be atomically disconnected 
from another, and we have stated when and how this is 
possible. 

Ignorance – defined not as the negation of knowledge but as a 
positive state of mind – is error produced by inference. 

(1) Let us first consider propositions asserting a predicate’s 
immediate connexion with or disconnexion from a subject. 
Here, it is true, positive error may befall one in alternative ways; 
for it may arise where one directly believes a connexion or 
disconnexion as well as where one’s belief is acquired by 
inference. The error, however, that consists in a direct belief is 
without complication; but the error resulting from inference – 
which here concerns us – takes many forms. Thus, let A be 
atomically disconnected from all B: then the conclusion inferred 
through a middle term C, that all B is A, will be a case of error 
produced by syllogism. Now, two cases are possible. Either (a) 
both premisses, or (b) one premiss only, may be false. (a) If 
neither A is an attribute of any C nor C of any B, whereas the 
contrary was posited in both cases, both premisses will be false. 
(C may quite well be so related to A and B that C is neither 
subordinate to A nor a universal attribute of B: for B, since A was 

said to be primarily disconnected from B, cannot have a genus, 
and A need not necessarily be a universal attribute of all things. 
Consequently both premisses may be false.) On the other hand, 

(b) one of the premisses may be true, though not either 
indifferently but only the major A-C since, B having no genus, 
the premiss C-B will always be false, while A-C may be true. This 
is the case if, for example, A is related atomically to both C and 
B; because when the same term is related atomically to more 
terms than one, neither of those terms will belong to the other. 
It is, of course, equally the case if A-C is not atomic. 
Error of attribution, then, occurs through these causes and in 
this form only – for we found that no syllogism of universal 
attribution was possible in any figure but the first. On the other 
hand, an error of non-attribution may occur either in the first or 
in the second figure. Let us therefore first explain the various 
forms it takes in the first figure and the character of the 
premisses in each case. 

(c) It may occur when both premisses are false; e.g. supposing A 
atomically connected with both C and B, if it be then assumed 
that no C is and all B is C, both premisses are false. 
(d) It is also possible when one is false. This may be either 
premiss indifferently. A-C may be true, C-B false – A-C true 
because A is not an attribute of all things, C-B false because C, 
which never has the attribute A, cannot be an attribute of B; for 
if C-B were true, the premiss A-C would no longer be true, and 
besides if both premisses were true, the conclusion would be 
true. Or again, C-B may be true and A-C false; e.g. if both C and 
A contain B as genera, one of them must be subordinate to the 
other, so that if the premiss takes the form No C is A, it will be 
false. This makes it clear that whether either or both premisses 
are false, the conclusion will equally be false. 

In the second figure the premisses cannot both be wholly false; 
for if all B is A, no middle term can be with truth universally 
affirmed of one extreme and universally denied of the other: 
but premisses in which the middle is affirmed of one extreme 
and denied of the other are the necessary condition if one is to 
get a valid inference at all. Therefore if, taken in this way, they 
are wholly false, their contraries conversely should be wholly 
true. But this is impossible. On the other hand, there is nothing 
to prevent both premisses being partially false; e.g. if actually 
some A is C and some B is C, then if it is premised that all A is C 
and no B is C, both premisses are false, yet partially, not wholly, 
false. The same is true if the major is made negative instead of 
the minor. Or one premiss may be wholly false, and it may be 
either of them. Thus, supposing that actually an attribute of all 
A must also be an attribute of all B, then if C is yet taken to be a 
universal attribute of all but universally non-attributable to B, CA 
will be true but C-B false. Again, actually that which is an 
attribute of no B will not be an attribute of all A either; for if it 
be an attribute of all A, it will also be an attribute of all B, which 
is contrary to supposition; but if C be nevertheless assumed to 
be a universal attribute of A, but an attribute of no B, then the 
premiss C-B is true but the major is false. The case is similar if 
the major is made the negative premiss. For in fact what is an 
attribute of no A will not be an attribute of any B either; and if it 
be yet assumed that C is universally non-attributable to A, but a 
universal attribute of B, the premiss C-A is true but the minor 
wholly false. Again, in fact it is false to assume that that which 
is an attribute of all B is an attribute of no A, for if it be an 
attribute of all B, it must be an attribute of some A. If then C is 
nevertheless assumed to be an attribute of all B but of no A, C-B 
will be true but C-A false. 

It is thus clear that in the case of atomic propositions erroneous 
inference will be possible not only when both premisses are 
false but also when only one is false. 


In the case of attributes not atomically connected with or 
disconnected from their subjects, (a) (i) as long as the false 
conclusion is inferred through the ‘appropriate’ middle, only the 
major and not both premisses can be false. By ‘appropriate 
middle’ I mean the middle term through which the 
contradictory – i.e. the true-conclusion is inferrible. Thus, let A 
be attributable to B through a middle term C: then, since to 
produce a conclusion the premiss C-B must be taken 
affirmatively, it is clear that this premiss must always be true, 
for its quality is not changed. But the major A-C is false, for it is 
by a change in the quality of A-C that the conclusion becomes 
its contradictory – i.e. true. Similarly (ii) if the middle is taken 
from another series of predication; e.g. suppose D to be not only 
contained within A as a part within its whole but also 
predicable of all B. Then the premiss D-B must remain 
unchanged, but the quality of A-D must be changed; so that D-B 
is always true, A-D always false. Such error is practically 
identical with that which is inferred through the ‘appropriate’ 
middle. On the other hand, (b) if the conclusion is not inferred 
through the ‘appropriate’ middle – (i) when the middle is 
subordinate to A but is predicable of no B, both premisses must 
be false, because if there is to be a conclusion both must be 
posited as asserting the contrary of what is actually the fact, 
and so posited both become false: e.g. suppose that actually all 
D is A but no B is D; then if these premisses are changed in 
quality, a conclusion will follow and both of the new premisses 
will be false. When, however, (ii) the middle D is not subordinate 
to A, A-D will be true, D-B false – A-D true because A was not 
subordinate to D, D-B false because if it had been true, the 


conclusion too would have been true; but it is ex hypothesi 
false. 

When the erroneous inference is in the second figure, both 
premisses cannot be entirely false; since if B is subordinate to A, 
there can be no middle predicable of all of one extreme and of 
none of the other, as was stated before. One premiss, however, 
may be false, and it may be either of them. Thus, if C is actually 
an attribute of both A and B, but is assumed to be an attribute of 
A only and not of B, C-A will be true, C-B false: or again if C be 
assumed to be attributable to B but to no A, C-B will be true, C-A 
false. 

We have stated when and through what kinds of premisses 
error will result in cases where the erroneous conclusion is 
negative. If the conclusion is affirmative, (a) (i) it may be 
inferred through the ‘appropriate’ middle term. In this case both 
premisses cannot be false since, as we said before, C-B must 
remain unchanged if there is to be a conclusion, and 
consequently A-C, the quality of which is changed, will always 
be false. This is equally true if (ii) the middle is taken from 
another series of predication, as was stated to be the case also 
with regard to negative error; for D-B must remain unchanged, 
while the quality of A-D must be converted, and the type of 
error is the same as before. 

(b) The middle may be inappropriate. Then (i) if D is subordinate 
to A, A-D will be true, but D-B false; since A may quite well be 
predicable of several terms no one of which can be 
subordinated to another. If, however, (ii) D is not subordinate to 
A, obviously A-D, since it is affirmed, will always be false, while 
D-B may be either true or false; for A may very well be an 
attribute of no D, whereas all B is D, e.g. no science is animal, all 
music is science. Equally well A may be an attribute of no D, and 
D of no B. It emerges, then, that if the middle term is not 

subordinate to the major, not only both premisses but either 
singly may be false. 

Thus we have made it clear how many varieties of erroneous 
inference are liable to happen and through what kinds of 
premisses they occur, in the case both of immediate and of 
demonstrable truths. 

It is also clear that the loss of any one of the senses entails the 
loss of a corresponding portion of knowledge, and that, since we 
learn either by induction or by demonstration, this knowledge 
cannot be acquired. Thus demonstration develops from 
universals, induction from particulars; but since it is possible to 
familiarize the pupil with even the so-called mathematical 
abstractions only through induction – i.e. only because each 
subject genus possesses, in virtue of a determinate 
mathematical character, certain properties which can be treated 
as separate even though they do not exist in isolation – it is 
consequently impossible to come to grasp universals except 
through induction. But induction is impossible for those who 
have not sense-perception. For it is sense-perception alone 
which is adequate for grasping the particulars: they cannot be 
objects of scientific knowledge, because neither can universals 
give us knowledge of them without induction, nor can we get it 
through induction without sense-perception. 


Every syllogism is effected by means of three terms. One kind of 
syllogism serves to prove that A inheres in C by showing that A 
inheres in B and B in C; the other is negative and one of its 
premisses asserts one term of another, while the other denies 
one term of another. It is clear, then, that these are the 
fundamentals and so-called hypotheses of syllogism. Assume 
them as they have been stated, and proof is bound to follow – 
proof that A inheres in C through B, and again that A inheres in 
B through some other middle term, and similarly that B inheres 
in C. If our reasoning aims at gaining credence and so is merely 
dialectical, it is obvious that we have only to see that our 
inference is based on premisses as credible as possible: so that 
if a middle term between A and B is credible though not real, 
one can reason through it and complete a dialectical syllogism. 
If, however, one is aiming at truth, one must be guided by the 
real connexions of subjects and attributes. Thus: since there are 
attributes which are predicated of a subject essentially or 
naturally and not coincidentally – not, that is, in the sense in 
which we say ‘That white (thing) is a man’, which is not the 
same mode of predication as when we say ‘The man is white’: 
the man is white not because he is something else but because 
he is man, but the white is man because ‘being white’ coincides 
with ‘humanity’ within one substratum – therefore there are 
terms such as are naturally subjects of predicates. Suppose, 
then, C such a term not itself attributable to anything else as to 
a subject, but the proximate subject of the attribute B – i.e. so 
that B-C is immediate; suppose further E related immediately to 
F, and F to B. The first question is, must this series terminate, or 
can it proceed to infinity? The second question is as follows: 
Suppose nothing is essentially predicated of A, but A is 
predicated primarily of H and of no intermediate prior term, and 
suppose H similarly related to G and G to B; then must this 
series also terminate, or can it too proceed to infinity? There is 


this much difference between the questions: the first is, is it 
possible to start from that which is not itself attributable to 
anything else but is the subject of attributes, and ascend to 
infinity? The second is the problem whether one can start from 
that which is a predicate but not itself a subject of predicates, 
and descend to infinity? A third question is, if the extreme 
terms are fixed, can there be an infinity of middles? I mean this: 
suppose for example that A inheres in C and B is intermediate 
between them, but between B and A there are other middles, 
and between these again fresh middles; can these proceed to 
infinity or can they not? This is the equivalent of inquiring, do 
demonstrations proceed to infinity, i.e. is everything 
demonstrable? Or do ultimate subject and primary attribute 
limit one another? 

I hold that the same questions arise with regard to negative 
conclusions and premisses: viz. if A is attributable to no B, then 
either this predication will be primary, or there will be an 
intermediate term prior to B to which a is not attributable – G, 
let us say, which is attributable to all B – and there may still be 
another term H prior to G, which is attributable to all G. The 
same questions arise, I say, because in these cases too either the 
series of prior terms to which a is not attributable is infinite or it 
terminates. 

One cannot ask the same questions in the case of reciprocating 
terms, since when subject and predicate are convertible there is 
neither primary nor ultimate subject, seeing that all the 
reciprocals qua subjects stand in the same relation to one 
another, whether we say that the subject has an infinity of 
attributes or that both subjects and attributes – and we raised 
the question in both cases – are infinite in number. These 
questions then cannot be asked – unless, indeed, the terms can 
reciprocate by two different modes, by accidental predication in 
one relation and natural predication in the other. 


Now, it is clear that if the predications terminate in both the 
upward and the downward direction (by ‘upward’ I mean the 
ascent to the more universal, by ‘downward’ the descent to the 
more particular), the middle terms cannot be infinite in number. 
For suppose that A is predicated of F, and that the intermediates 

– call them B B’ B”... – are infinite, then clearly you might 
descend from and find one term predicated of another ad 
infinitum, since you have an infinity of terms between you and 
F; and equally, if you ascend from F, there are infinite terms 
between you and A. It follows that if these processes are 
impossible there cannot be an infinity of intermediates between 
A and F. Nor is it of any effect to urge that some terms of the 
series AB...F are contiguous so as to exclude intermediates, 
while others cannot be taken into the argument at all: 
whichever terms of the series B...I take, the number of 
intermediates in the direction either of A or of F must be finite 
or infinite: where the infinite series starts, whether from the 
first term or from a later one, is of no moment, for the 
succeeding terms in any case are infinite in number. 
Further, if in affirmative demonstration the series terminates in 
both directions, clearly it will terminate too in negative 
demonstration. Let us assume that we cannot proceed to 
infinity either by ascending from the ultimate term (by ‘ultimate 
term’ I mean a term such as was, not itself attributable to a 


subject but itself the subject of attributes), or by descending 
towards an ultimate from the primary term (by ‘primary term’ I 
mean a term predicable of a subject but not itself a subject). If 
this assumption is justified, the series will also terminate in the 
case of negation. For a negative conclusion can be proved in all 
three figures. In the first figure it is proved thus: no B is A, all C 
is B. In packing the interval B-C we must reach immediate 
propositions – as is always the case with the minor premiss – 
since B-C is affirmative. As regards the other premiss it is plain 
that if the major term is denied of a term D prior to B, D will 
have to be predicable of all B, and if the major is denied of yet 
another term prior to D, this term must be predicable of all D. 
Consequently, since the ascending series is finite, the descent 
will also terminate and there will be a subject of which A is 
primarily non-predicable. In the second figure the syllogism is, 
all A is B, no C is B,..no C is A. If proof of this is required, plainly 
it may be shown either in the first figure as above, in the second 
as here, or in the third. The first figure has been discussed, and 
we will proceed to display the second, proof by which will be as 
follows: all B is D, no C is D..., since it is required that B should 
be a subject of which a predicate is affirmed. Next, since D is to 
be proved not to belong to C, then D has a further predicate 
which is denied of C. Therefore, since the succession of 
predicates affirmed of an ever higher universal terminates, the 
succession of predicates denied terminates too. 

The third figure shows it as follows: all B is A, some B is not C. 
Therefore some A is not C. This premiss, i.e. C-B, will be proved 
either in the same figure or in one of the two figures discussed 
above. In the first and second figures the series terminates. If 
we use the third figure, we shall take as premisses, all E is B, 
some E is not C, and this premiss again will be proved by a 
similar prosyllogism. But since it is assumed that the series of 
descending subjects also terminates, plainly the series of more 
universal non-predicables will terminate also. Even supposing 


that the proof is not confined to one method, but employs them 
all and is now in the first figure, now in the second or third – 
even so the regress will terminate, for the methods are finite in 
number, and if finite things are combined in a finite number of 
ways, the result must be finite. 

Thus it is plain that the regress of middles terminates in the 
case of negative demonstration, if it does so also in the case of 
affirmative demonstration. That in fact the regress terminates 
in both these cases may be made clear by the following 
dialectical considerations. 

In the case of predicates constituting the essential nature of a 
thing, it clearly terminates, seeing that if definition is possible, 
or in other words, if essential form is knowable, and an infinite 
series cannot be traversed, predicates constituting a thing’s 
essential nature must be finite in number. But as regards 
predicates generally we have the following prefatory remarks to 
make. (1) We can affirm without falsehood ‘the white (thing) is 
walking’, and that big (thing) is a log’; or again, ‘the log is big’, 
and ‘the man walks’. But the affirmation differs in the two 
cases. When I affirm ‘the white is a log’, I mean that something 
which happens to be white is a log – not that white is the 
substratum in which log inheres, for it was not qua white or qua 
a species of white that the white (thing) came to be a log, and 
the white (thing) is consequently not a log except incidentally. 
On the other hand, when I affirm ‘the log is white’, I do not 
mean that something else, which happens also to be a log, is 
white (as I should if I said ‘the musician is white,’ which would 
mean ‘the man who happens also to be a musician is white’); on 


the contrary, log is here the substratum – the substratum which 
actually came to be white, and did so qua wood or qua a species 
of wood and qua nothing else. 

If we must lay down a rule, let us entitle the latter kind of 
statement predication, and the former not predication at all, or 
not strict but accidental predication. ‘White’ and ‘log’ will thus 
serve as types respectively of predicate and subject. 

We shall assume, then, that the predicate is invariably 
predicated strictly and not accidentally of the subject, for on 
such predication demonstrations depend for their force. It 
follows from this that when a single attribute is predicated of a 
single subject, the predicate must affirm of the subject either 
some element constituting its essential nature, or that it is in 
some way qualified, quantified, essentially related, active, 
passive, placed, or dated. 

(2) Predicates which signify substance signify that the subject is 
identical with the predicate or with a species of the predicate. 
Predicates not signifying substance which are predicated of a 
subject not identical with themselves or with a species of 
themselves are accidental or coincidental; e.g. white is a 
coincident of man, seeing that man is not identical with white 
or a species of white, but rather with animal, since man is 
identical with a species of animal. These predicates which do 
not signify substance must be predicates of some other subject, 
and nothing can be white which is not also other than white. 
The Forms we can dispense with, for they are mere sound 
without sense; and even if there are such things, they are not 
relevant to our discussion, since demonstrations are concerned 
with predicates such as we have defined. 
(3) If A is a quality of B, B cannot be a quality of A – a quality of a 
quality. Therefore A and B cannot be predicated reciprocally of 
one another in strict predication: they can be affirmed without 

falsehood of one another, but not genuinely predicated of each 
other. For one alternative is that they should be substantially 
predicated of one another, i.e. B would become the genus or 
differentia of A – the predicate now become subject. But it has 
been shown that in these substantial predications neither the 
ascending predicates nor the descending subjects form an 
infinite series; e.g. neither the series, man is biped, biped is 
animal, &c., nor the series predicating animal of man, man of 
Callias, Callias of a further. subject as an element of its essential 
nature, is infinite. For all such substance is definable, and an 
infinite series cannot be traversed in thought: consequently 
neither the ascent nor the descent is infinite, since a substance 
whose predicates were infinite would not be definable. Hence 
they will not be predicated each as the genus of the other; for 
this would equate a genus with one of its own species. Nor (the 
other alternative) can a quale be reciprocally predicated of a 
quale, nor any term belonging to an adjectival category of 
another such term, except by accidental predication; for all such 
predicates are coincidents and are predicated of substances. On 
the other hand – in proof of the impossibility of an infinite 
ascending series – every predication displays the subject as 
somehow qualified or quantified or as characterized under one 
of the other adjectival categories, or else is an element in its 
substantial nature: these latter are limited in number, and the 
number of the widest kinds under which predications fall is 
also limited, for every predication must exhibit its subject as 
somehow qualified, quantified, essentially related, acting or 
suffering, or in some place or at some time. 

I assume first that predication implies a single subject and a 
single attribute, and secondly that predicates which are not 
substantial are not predicated of one another. We assume this 
because such predicates are all coincidents, and though some 
are essential coincidents, others of a different type, yet we 
maintain that all of them alike are predicated of some 


substratum and that a coincident is never a substratum – since 
we do not class as a coincident anything which does not owe its 
designation to its being something other than itself, but always 
hold that any coincident is predicated of some substratum 
other than itself, and that another group of coincidents may 
have a different substratum. Subject to these assumptions then, 
neither the ascending nor the descending series of predication 
in which a single attribute is predicated of a single subject is 
infinite. For the subjects of which coincidents are predicated are 
as many as the constitutive elements of each individual 
substance, and these we have seen are not infinite in number, 
while in the ascending series are contained those constitutive 
elements with their coincidents – both of which are finite. We 
conclude that there is a given subject (D) of which some 
attribute (C) is primarily predicable; that there must be an 
attribute (B) primarily predicable of the first attribute, and that 
the series must end with a term (A) not predicable of any term 
prior to the last subject of which it was predicated (B), and of 
which no term prior to it is predicable. 

The argument we have given is one of the so-called proofs; an 
alternative proof follows. Predicates so related to their subjects 
that there are other predicates prior to them predicable of those 
subjects are demonstrable; but of demonstrable propositions 
one cannot have something better than knowledge, nor can one 
know them without demonstration. Secondly, if a consequent is 
only known through an antecedent (viz. premisses prior to it) 
and we neither know this antecedent nor have something 
better than knowledge of it, then we shall not have scientific 
knowledge of the consequent. Therefore, if it is possible through 
demonstration to know anything without qualification and not 
merely as dependent on the acceptance of certain premisses – 

i.e. hypothetically – the series of intermediate predications must 
terminate. If it does not terminate, and beyond any predicate 
taken as higher than another there remains another still higher, 

then every predicate is demonstrable. Consequently, since these 
demonstrable predicates are infinite in number and therefore 
cannot be traversed, we shall not know them by demonstration. 
If, therefore, we have not something better than knowledge of 
them, we cannot through demonstration have unqualified but 
only hypothetical science of anything. 

As dialectical proofs of our contention these may carry 
conviction, but an analytic process will show more briefly that 
neither the ascent nor the descent of predication can be infinite 
in the demonstrative sciences which are the object of our 
investigation. Demonstration proves the inherence of essential 
attributes in things. Now attributes may be essential for two 
reasons: either because they are elements in the essential 
nature of their subjects, or because their subjects are elements 
in their essential nature. An example of the latter is odd as an 
attribute of number – though it is number’s attribute, yet 
number itself is an element in the definition of odd; of the 
former, multiplicity or the indivisible, which are elements in the 
definition of number. In neither kind of attribution can the 
terms be infinite. They are not infinite where each is related to 
the term below it as odd is to number, for this would mean the 
inherence in odd of another attribute of odd in whose nature 
odd was an essential element: but then number will be an 
ultimate subject of the whole infinite chain of attributes, and be 
an element in the definition of each of them. Hence, since an 
infinity of attributes such as contain their subject in their 
definition cannot inhere in a single thing, the ascending series 
is equally finite. Note, moreover, that all such attributes must so 
inhere in the ultimate subject – e.g. its attributes in number and 
number in them – as to be commensurate with the subject and 
not of wider extent. Attributes which are essential elements in 
the nature of their subjects are equally finite: otherwise 
definition would be impossible. Hence, if all the attributes 
predicated are essential and these cannot be infinite, the 


ascending series will terminate, and consequently the 
descending series too. 

If this is so, it follows that the intermediates between any two 
terms are also always limited in number. An immediately 
obvious consequence of this is that demonstrations necessarily 
involve basic truths, and that the contention of some – referred 
to at the outset – that all truths are demonstrable is mistaken. 
For if there are basic truths, (a) not all truths are demonstrable, 
and (b) an infinite regress is impossible; since if either (a) or (b) 
were not a fact, it would mean that no interval was immediate 
and indivisible, but that all intervals were divisible. This is true 
because a conclusion is demonstrated by the interposition, not 
the apposition, of a fresh term. If such interposition could 
continue to infinity there might be an infinite number of terms 
between any two terms; but this is impossible if both the 
ascending and descending series of predication terminate; and 
of this fact, which before was shown dialectically, analytic proof 
has now been given. 

It is an evident corollary of these conclusions that if the same 
attribute A inheres in two terms C and D predicable either not at 
all, or not of all instances, of one another, it does not always 
belong to them in virtue of a common middle term. Isosceles 
and scalene possess the attribute of having their angles equal to 
two right angles in virtue of a common middle; for they possess 
it in so far as they are both a certain kind of figure, and not in so 
far as they differ from one another. But this is not always the 
case: for, were it so, if we take B as the common middle in virtue 
of which A inheres in C and D, clearly B would inhere in C and D 


through a second common middle, and this in turn would 
inhere in C and D through a third, so that between two terms an 
infinity of intermediates would fall – an impossibility. Thus it 
need not always be in virtue of a common middle term that a 
single attribute inheres in several subjects, since there must be 
immediate intervals. Yet if the attribute to be proved common to 
two subjects is to be one of their essential attributes, the middle 
terms involved must be within one subject genus and be 
derived from the same group of immediate premisses; for we 
have seen that processes of proof cannot pass from one genus 
to another. 

It is also clear that when A inheres in B, this can be 
demonstrated if there is a middle term. Further, the ‘elements’ 
of such a conclusion are the premisses containing the middle in 
question, and they are identical in number with the middle 
terms, seeing that the immediate propositions – or at least such 
immediate propositions as are universal – are the ‘elements’. If, 
on the other hand, there is no middle term, demonstration 
ceases to be possible: we are on the way to the basic truths. 
Similarly if A does not inhere in B, this can be demonstrated if 
there is a middle term or a term prior to B in which A does not 
inhere: otherwise there is no demonstration and a basic truth is 
reached. There are, moreover, as many ‘elements’ of the 
demonstrated conclusion as there are middle terms, since it is 
propositions containing these middle terms that are the basic 
premisses on which the demonstration rests; and as there are 
some indemonstrable basic truths asserting that ‘this is that’ or 
that ‘this inheres in that’, so there are others denying that ‘this 
is that’ or that ‘this inheres in that’ – in fact some basic truths 
will affirm and some will deny being. 

When we are to prove a conclusion, we must take a primary 
essential predicate – suppose it C – of the subject B, and then 
suppose A similarly predicable of C. If we proceed in this 


manner, no proposition or attribute which falls beyond A is 
admitted in the proof: the interval is constantly condensed until 
subject and predicate become indivisible, i.e. one. We have our 
unit when the premiss becomes immediate, since the 
immediate premiss alone is a single premiss in the unqualified 
sense of ‘single’. And as in other spheres the basic element is 
simple but not identical in all – in a system of weight it is the 
mina, in music the quarter-tone, and so on – so in syllogism the 
unit is an immediate premiss, and in the knowledge that 
demonstration gives it is an intuition. In syllogisms, then, which 
prove the inherence of an attribute, nothing falls outside the 
major term. In the case of negative syllogisms on the other 
hand, (1) in the first figure nothing falls outside the major term 
whose inherence is in question; e.g. to prove through a middle C 
that A does not inhere in B the premisses required are, all B is C, 
no C is A. Then if it has to be proved that no C is A, a middle 
must be found between and C; and this procedure will never 
vary. 

(2) If we have to show that E is not D by means of the premisses, 
all D is C; no E, or not all E, is C; then the middle will never fall 
beyond E, and E is the subject of which D is to be denied in the 
conclusion. 
(3) In the third figure the middle will never fall beyond the 
limits of the subject and the attribute denied of it. 
Since demonstrations may be either commensurately universal 
or particular, and either affirmative or negative; the question 
arises, which form is the better? And the same question may be 
put in regard to so-called ‘direct’ demonstration and reductio ad 


impossibile. Let us first examine the commensurately universal 
and the particular forms, and when we have cleared up this 
problem proceed to discuss ‘direct’ demonstration and reductio 
ad impossibile. 

The following considerations might lead some minds to prefer 
particular demonstration. 

(1) The superior demonstration is the demonstration which 
gives us greater knowledge (for this is the ideal of 
demonstration), and we have greater knowledge of a particular 
individual when we know it in itself than when we know it 
through something else; e.g. we know Coriscus the musician 
better when we know that Coriscus is musical than when we 
know only that man is musical, and a like argument holds in all 
other cases. But commensurately universal demonstration, 
instead of proving that the subject itself actually is x, proves 
only that something else is x – e.g. in attempting to prove that 
isosceles is x, it proves not that isosceles but only that triangle 
is x – whereas particular demonstration proves that the subject 
itself is x. The demonstration, then, that a subject, as such, 
possesses an attribute is superior. If this is so, and if the 
particular rather than the commensurately universal forms 
demonstrates, particular demonstration is superior. 
(2) The universal has not a separate being over against groups of 
singulars. Demonstration nevertheless creates the opinion that 
its function is conditioned by something like this – some 
separate entity belonging to the real world; that, for instance, of 
triangle or of figure or number, over against particular triangles, 
figures, and numbers. But demonstration which touches the 
real and will not mislead is superior to that which moves 
among unrealities and is delusory. Now commensurately 
universal demonstration is of the latter kind: if we engage in it 
we find ourselves reasoning after a fashion well illustrated by 

the argument that the proportionate is what answers to the 
definition of some entity which is neither line, number, solid, 
nor plane, but a proportionate apart from all these. Since, then, 
such a proof is characteristically commensurate and universal, 
and less touches reality than does particular demonstration, 
and creates a false opinion, it will follow that commensurate 
and universal is inferior to particular demonstration. 

We may retort thus. (1) The first argument applies no more to 
commensurate and universal than to particular demonstration. 
If equality to two right angles is attributable to its subject not 
qua isosceles but qua triangle, he who knows that isosceles 
possesses that attribute knows the subject as qua itself 
possessing the attribute, to a less degree than he who knows 
that triangle has that attribute. To sum up the whole matter: if a 
subject is proved to possess qua triangle an attribute which it 
does not in fact possess qua triangle, that is not demonstration: 
but if it does possess it qua triangle the rule applies that the 
greater knowledge is his who knows the subject as possessing 
its attribute qua that in virtue of which it actually does possess 
it. Since, then, triangle is the wider term, and there is one 
identical definition of triangle – i.e. the term is not equivocal – 
and since equality to two right angles belongs to all triangles, it 
is isosceles qua triangle and not triangle qua isosceles which 
has its angles so related. It follows that he who knows a 
connexion universally has greater knowledge of it as it in fact is 
than he who knows the particular; and the inference is that 
commensurate and universal is superior to particular 
demonstration. 

(2) If there is a single identical definition i.e. if the 
commensurate universal is unequivocal – then the universal 
will possess being not less but more than some of the 
particulars, inasmuch as it is universals which comprise the 
imperishable, particulars that tend to perish. 

(3) Because the universal has a single meaning, we are not 
therefore compelled to suppose that in these examples it has 
being as a substance apart from its particulars – any more than 
we need make a similar supposition in the other cases of 
unequivocal universal predication, viz. where the predicate 
signifies not substance but quality, essential relatedness, or 
action. If such a supposition is entertained, the blame rests not 
with the demonstration but with the hearer. 
(4) Demonstration is syllogism that proves the cause, i.e. the 
reasoned fact, and it is rather the commensurate universal than 
the particular which is causative (as may be shown thus: that 
which possesses an attribute through its own essential nature is 
itself the cause of the inherence, and the commensurate 
universal is primary; hence the commensurate universal is the 
cause). Consequently commensurately universal demonstration 
is superior as more especially proving the cause, that is the 
reasoned fact. 
(5) Our search for the reason ceases, and we think that we know, 
when the coming to be or existence of the fact before us is not 
due to the coming to be or existence of some other fact, for the 
last step of a search thus conducted is eo ipso the end and limit 
of the problem. Thus: ‘Why did he come?’ ‘To get the money – 
wherewith to pay a debt – that he might thereby do what was 
right.’ When in this regress we can no longer find an efficient or 
final cause, we regard the last step of it as the end of the coming 
– or being or coming to be – and we regard ourselves as then 
only having full knowledge of the reason why he came. 
If, then, all causes and reasons are alike in this respect, and if 
this is the means to full knowledge in the case of final causes 
such as we have exemplified, it follows that in the case of the 
other causes also full knowledge is attained when an attribute 
no longer inheres because of something else. Thus, when we 


learn that exterior angles are equal to four right angles because 
they are the exterior angles of an isosceles, there still remains 
the question ‘Why has isosceles this attribute?’ and its answer 
‘Because it is a triangle, and a triangle has it because a triangle 
is a rectilinear figure.’ If rectilinear figure possesses the property 
for no further reason, at this point we have full knowledge – but 
at this point our knowledge has become commensurately 
universal, and so we conclude that commensurately universal 
demonstration is superior. 

(6) The more demonstration becomes particular the more it 
sinks into an indeterminate manifold, while universal 
demonstration tends to the simple and determinate. But objects 
so far as they are an indeterminate manifold are unintelligible, 
so far as they are determinate, intelligible: they are therefore 
intelligible rather in so far as they are universal than in so far as 
they are particular. From this it follows that universals are more 
demonstrable: but since relative and correlative increase 
concomitantly, of the more demonstrable there will be fuller 
demonstration. Hence the commensurate and universal form, 
being more truly demonstration, is the superior. 
(7) Demonstration which teaches two things is preferable to 
demonstration which teaches only one. He who possesses 
commensurately universal demonstration knows the particular 
as well, but he who possesses particular demonstration does 
not know the universal. So that this is an additional reason for 
preferring commensurately universal demonstration. And there 
is yet this further argument: 
(8) Proof becomes more and more proof of the commensurate 
universal as its middle term approaches nearer to the basic 
truth, and nothing is so near as the immediate premiss which is 
itself the basic truth. If, then, proof from the basic truth is more 
accurate than proof not so derived, demonstration which 

depends more closely on it is more accurate than 
demonstration which is less closely dependent. But 
commensurately universal demonstration is characterized by 
this closer dependence, and is therefore superior. Thus, if A had 
to be proved to inhere in D, and the middles were B and C, B 
being the higher term would render the demonstration which it 
mediated the more universal. 

Some of these arguments, however, are dialectical. The clearest 
indication of the precedence of commensurately universal 
demonstration is as follows: if of two propositions, a prior and a 
posterior, we have a grasp of the prior, we have a kind of 
knowledge – a potential grasp – of the posterior as well. For 
example, if one knows that the angles of all triangles are equal 
to two right angles, one knows in a sense – potentially – that the 
isosceles’ angles also are equal to two right angles, even if one 
does not know that the isosceles is a triangle; but to grasp this 
posterior proposition is by no means to know the 
commensurate universal either potentially or actually. 
Moreover, commensurately universal demonstration is through 
and through intelligible; particular demonstration issues in 
sense-perception. 

The preceding arguments constitute our defence of the 
superiority of commensurately universal to particular 
demonstration. That affirmative demonstration excels negative 
may be shown as follows. 

(1) We may assume the superiority ceteris paribus of the 
demonstration which derives from fewer postulates or 
hypotheses – in short from fewer premisses; for, given that all 

these are equally well known, where they are fewer knowledge 
will be more speedily acquired, and that is a desideratum. The 
argument implied in our contention that demonstration from 
fewer assumptions is superior may be set out in universal form 
as follows. Assuming that in both cases alike the middle terms 
are known, and that middles which are prior are better known 
than such as are posterior, we may suppose two demonstrations 
of the inherence of A in E, the one proving it through the 
middles B, C and D, the other through F and G. Then A-D is 
known to the same degree as A-E (in the second proof), but A-D 
is better known than and prior to A-E (in the first proof); since 
A-E is proved through A-D, and the ground is more certain than 
the conclusion. 

Hence demonstration by fewer premisses is ceteris paribus 
superior. Now both affirmative and negative demonstration 
operate through three terms and two premisses, but whereas 
the former assumes only that something is, the latter assumes 
both that something is and that something else is not, and thus 
operating through more kinds of premiss is inferior. 

(2) It has been proved that no conclusion follows if both 
premisses are negative, but that one must be negative, the other 
affirmative. So we are compelled to lay down the following 
additional rule: as the demonstration expands, the affirmative 
premisses must increase in number, but there cannot be more 
than one negative premiss in each complete proof. Thus, 
suppose no B is A, and all C is B. Then if both the premisses are 
to be again expanded, a middle must be interposed. Let us 
interpose D between A and B, and E between B and C. Then 
clearly E is affirmatively related to B and C, while D is 
affirmatively related to B but negatively to A; for all B is D, but 
there must be no D which is A. Thus there proves to be a single 
negative premiss, A-D. In the further prosyllogisms too it is the 
same, because in the terms of an affirmative syllogism the 

middle is always related affirmatively to both extremes; in a 
negative syllogism it must be negatively related only to one of 
them, and so this negation comes to be a single negative 
premiss, the other premisses being affirmative. If, then, that 
through which a truth is proved is a better known and more 
certain truth, and if the negative proposition is proved through 
the affirmative and not vice versa, affirmative demonstration, 
being prior and better known and more certain, will be superior. 

(3) The basic truth of demonstrative syllogism is the universal 
immediate premiss, and the universal premiss asserts in 
affirmative demonstration and in negative denies: and the 
affirmative proposition is prior to and better known than the 
negative (since affirmation explains denial and is prior to 
denial, just as being is prior to not-being). It follows that the 
basic premiss of affirmative demonstration is superior to that of 
negative demonstration, and the demonstration which uses 
superior basic premisses is superior. 
(4) Affirmative demonstration is more of the nature of a basic 
form of proof, because it is a sine qua non of negative 
demonstration. 
Since affirmative demonstration is superior to negative, it is 
clearly superior also to reductio ad impossibile. We must first 
make certain what is the difference between negative 
demonstration and reductio ad impossibile. Let us suppose that 
no B is A, and that all C is B: the conclusion necessarily follows 
that no C is A. If these premisses are assumed, therefore, the 
negative demonstration that no C is A is direct. Reductio ad 
impossibile, on the other hand, proceeds as follows. Supposing 


we are to prove that does not inhere in B, we have to assume 
that it does inhere, and further that B inheres in C, with the 
resulting inference that A inheres in C. This we have to suppose 
a known and admitted impossibility; and we then infer that A 
cannot inhere in B. Thus if the inherence of B in C is not 
questioned, A’s inherence in B is impossible. 

The order of the terms is the same in both proofs: they differ 
according to which of the negative propositions is the better 
known, the one denying A of B or the one denying A of C. When 
the falsity of the conclusion is the better known, we use 
reductio ad impossible; when the major premiss of the 
syllogism is the more obvious, we use direct demonstration. All 
the same the proposition denying A of B is, in the order of being, 
prior to that denying A of C; for premisses are prior to the 
conclusion which follows from them, and ‘no C is A’ is the 
conclusion, ‘no B is A’ one of its premisses. For the destructive 
result of reductio ad impossibile is not a proper conclusion, nor 
are its antecedents proper premisses. On the contrary: the 
constituents of syllogism are premisses related to one another 
as whole to part or part to whole, whereas the premisses A-C 
and A-B are not thus related to one another. Now the superior 
demonstration is that which proceeds from better known and 
prior premisses, and while both these forms depend for 
credence on the not-being of something, yet the source of the 
one is prior to that of the other. Therefore negative 
demonstration will have an unqualified superiority to reductio 
ad impossibile, and affirmative demonstration, being superior to 
negative, will consequently be superior also to reductio ad 
impossibile. 


The science which is knowledge at once of the fact and of the 
reasoned fact, not of the fact by itself without the reasoned fact, 
is the more exact and the prior science. 

A science such as arithmetic, which is not a science of 
properties qua inhering in a substratum, is more exact than and 
prior to a science like harmonics, which is a science of 
pr,operties inhering in a substratum; and similarly a science like 
arithmetic, which is constituted of fewer basic elements, is 
more exact than and prior to geometry, which requires 
additional elements. What I mean by ‘additional elements’ is 
this: a unit is substance without position, while a point is 
substance with position; the latter contains an additional 
element. 

A single science is one whose domain is a single genus, viz. all 
the subjects constituted out of the primary entities of the genus 

– i.e. the parts of this total subject – and their essential 
properties. 
One science differs from another when their basic truths have 
neither a common source nor are derived those of the one 
science from those the other. This is verified when we reach the 
indemonstrable premisses of a science, for they must be within 
one genus with its conclusions: and this again is verified if the 
conclusions proved by means of them fall within one genus – 

i.e. are homogeneous. 

One can have several demonstrations of the same connexion 
not only by taking from the same series of predication middles 
which are other than the immediately cohering term e.g. by 
taking C, D, and F severally to prove A-B – but also by taking a 
middle from another series. Thus let A be change, D alteration 
of a property, B feeling pleasure, and G relaxation. We can then 
without falsehood predicate D of B and A of D, for he who is 
pleased suffers alteration of a property, and that which alters a 
property changes. Again, we can predicate A of G without 
falsehood, and G of B; for to feel pleasure is to relax, and to relax 
is to change. So the conclusion can be drawn through middles 
which are different, i.e. not in the same series – yet not so that 
neither of these middles is predicable of the other, for they must 
both be attributable to some one subject. 

A further point worth investigating is how many ways of 
proving the same conclusion can be obtained by varying the 
figure. 

There is no knowledge by demonstration of chance 
conjunctions; for chance conjunctions exist neither by necessity 
nor as general connexions but comprise what comes to be as 
something distinct from these. Now demonstration is 
concerned only with one or other of these two; for all reasoning 
proceeds from necessary or general premisses, the conclusion 
being necessary if the premisses are necessary and general if 


the premisses are general. Consequently, if chance conjunctions 
are neither general nor necessary, they are not demonstrable. 

Scientific knowledge is not possible through the act of 
perception. Even if perception as a faculty is of ‘the such’ and 
not merely of a ‘this somewhat’, yet one must at any rate 
actually perceive a ‘this somewhat’, and at a definite present 
place and time: but that which is commensurately universal 
and true in all cases one cannot perceive, since it is not ‘this’ 
and it is not ‘now’; if it were, it would not be commensurately 
universal – the term we apply to what is always and 
everywhere. Seeing, therefore, that demonstrations are 
commensurately universal and universals imperceptible, we 
clearly cannot obtain scientific knowledge by the act of 
perception: nay, it is obvious that even if it were possible to 
perceive that a triangle has its angles equal to two right angles, 
we should still be looking for a demonstration – we should not 
(as some say) possess knowledge of it; for perception must be of 
a particular, whereas scientific knowledge involves the 
recognition of the commensurate universal. So if we were on 
the moon, and saw the earth shutting out the sun’s light, we 
should not know the cause of the eclipse: we should perceive 
the present fact of the eclipse, but not the reasoned fact at all, 
since the act of perception is not of the commensurate 
universal. I do not, of course, deny that by watching the 
frequent recurrence of this event we might, after tracking the 
commensurate universal, possess a demonstration, for the 
commensurate universal is elicited from the several groups of 
singulars. 


The commensurate universal is precious because it makes clear 
the cause; so that in the case of facts like these which have a 
cause other than themselves universal knowledge is more 
precious than sense-perceptions and than intuition. (As regards 
primary truths there is of course a different account to be 
given.) Hence it is clear that knowledge of things demonstrable 
cannot be acquired by perception, unless the term perception is 
applied to the possession of scientific knowledge through 
demonstration. Nevertheless certain points do arise with regard 
to connexions to be proved which are referred for their 
explanation to a failure in sense-perception: there are cases 
when an act of vision would terminate our inquiry, not because 
in seeing we should be knowing, but because we should have 
elicited the universal from seeing; if, for example, we saw the 
pores in the glass and the light passing through, the reason of 
the kindling would be clear to us because we should at the 
same time see it in each instance and intuit that it must be so 
in all instances. 

All syllogisms cannot have the same basic truths. This may be 
shown first of all by the following dialectical considerations. (1) 
Some syllogisms are true and some false: for though a true 
inference is possible from false premisses, yet this occurs once 
only – I mean if A for instance, is truly predicable of C, but B, the 
middle, is false, both A-B and B-C being false; nevertheless, if 
middles are taken to prove these premisses, they will be false 
because every conclusion which is a falsehood has false 
premisses, while true conclusions have true premisses, and 
false and true differ in kind. Then again, (2) falsehoods are not 
all derived from a single identical set of principles: there are 


falsehoods which are the contraries of one another and cannot 
coexist, e.g. ‘justice is injustice’, and ‘justice is cowardice’; ‘man 
is horse’, and ‘man is ox’; ‘the equal is greater’, and ‘the equal is 
less.’ From established principles we may argue the case as 
follows, confining ourselves therefore to true conclusions. Not 
even all these are inferred from the same basic truths; many of 
them in fact have basic truths which differ generically and are 
not transferable; units, for instance, which are without position, 
cannot take the place of points, which have position. The 
transferred terms could only fit in as middle terms or as major 
or minor terms, or else have some of the other terms between 
them, others outside them. 

Nor can any of the common axioms – such, I mean, as the law 
of excluded middle – serve as premisses for the proof of all 
conclusions. For the kinds of being are different, and some 
attributes attach to quanta and some to qualia only; and proof 
is achieved by means of the common axioms taken in 
conjunction with these several kinds and their attributes. 

Again, it is not true that the basic truths are much fewer than 
the conclusions, for the basic truths are the premisses, and the 
premisses are formed by the apposition of a fresh extreme term 
or the interposition of a fresh middle. Moreover, the number of 
conclusions is indefinite, though the number of middle terms is 
finite; and lastly some of the basic truths are necessary, others 
variable. 

Looking at it in this way we see that, since the number of 
conclusions is indefinite, the basic truths cannot be identical or 
limited in number. If, on the other hand, identity is used in 
another sense, and it is said, e.g. ‘these and no other are the 
fundamental truths of geometry, these the fundamentals of 
calculation, these again of medicine’; would the statement 
mean anything except that the sciences have basic truths? To 


call them identical because they are self-identical is absurd, 
since everything can be identified with everything in that sense 
of identity. Nor again can the contention that all conclusions 
have the same basic truths mean that from the mass of all 
possible premisses any conclusion may be drawn. That would 
be exceedingly naive, for it is not the case in the clearly evident 
mathematical sciences, nor is it possible in analysis, since it is 
the immediate premisses which are the basic truths, and a 
fresh conclusion is only formed by the addition of a new 
immediate premiss: but if it be admitted that it is these primary 
immediate premisses which are basic truths, each subject-
genus will provide one basic truth. If, however, it is not argued 
that from the mass of all possible premisses any conclusion 
may be proved, nor yet admitted that basic truths differ so as to 
be generically different for each science, it remains to consider 
the possibility that, while the basic truths of all knowledge are 
within one genus, special premisses are required to prove 
special conclusions. But that this cannot be the case has been 
shown by our proof that the basic truths of things generically 
different themselves differ generically. For fundamental truths 
are of two kinds, those which are premisses of demonstration 
and the subject-genus; and though the former are common, the 
latter – number, for instance, and magnitude – are peculiar. 

Scientific knowledge and its object differ from opinion and the 
object of opinion in that scientific knowledge is 
commensurately universal and proceeds by necessary 
connexions, and that which is necessary cannot be otherwise. 
So though there are things which are true and real and yet can 
be otherwise, scientific knowledge clearly does not concern 


them: if it did, things which can be otherwise would be 
incapable of being otherwise. Nor are they any concern of 
rational intuition – by rational intuition I mean an originative 
source of scientific knowledge – nor of indemonstrable 
knowledge, which is the grasping of the immediate premiss. 
Since then rational intuition, science, and opinion, and what is 
revealed by these terms, are the only things that can be ‘true’, it 
follows that it is opinion that is concerned with that which may 
be true or false, and can be otherwise: opinion in fact is the 
grasp of a premiss which is immediate but not necessary. This 
view also fits the observed facts, for opinion is unstable, and so 
is the kind of being we have described as its object. Besides, 
when a man thinks a truth incapable of being otherwise he 
always thinks that he knows it, never that he opines it. He 
thinks that he opines when he thinks that a connexion, though 
actually so, may quite easily be otherwise; for he believes that 
such is the proper object of opinion, while the necessary is the 
object of knowledge. 

In what sense, then, can the same thing be the object of both 
opinion and knowledge? And if any one chooses to maintain 
that all that he knows he can also opine, why should not 
opinion be knowledge? For he that knows and he that opines 
will follow the same train of thought through the same middle 
terms until the immediate premisses are reached; because it is 
possible to opine not only the fact but also the reasoned fact, 
and the reason is the middle term; so that, since the former 
knows, he that opines also has knowledge. 

The truth perhaps is that if a man grasp truths that cannot be 
other than they are, in the way in which he grasps the 
definitions through which demonstrations take place, he will 
have not opinion but knowledge: if on the other hand he 
apprehends these attributes as inhering in their subjects, but 
not in virtue of the subjects’ substance and essential nature 


possesses opinion and not genuine knowledge; and his opinion, 
if obtained through immediate premisses, will be both of the 
fact and of the reasoned fact; if not so obtained, of the fact 
alone. The object of opinion and knowledge is not quite 
identical; it is only in a sense identical, just as the object of true 
and false opinion is in a sense identical. The sense in which 
some maintain that true and false opinion can have the same 
object leads them to embrace many strange doctrines, 
particularly the doctrine that what a man opines falsely he does 
not opine at all. There are really many senses of ‘identical’, and 
in one sense the object of true and false opinion can be the 
same, in another it cannot. Thus, to have a true opinion that the 
diagonal is commensurate with the side would be absurd: but 
because the diagonal with which they are both concerned is the 
same, the two opinions have objects so far the same: on the 
other hand, as regards their essential definable nature these 
objects differ. The identity of the objects of knowledge and 
opinion is similar. Knowledge is the apprehension of, e.g. the 
attribute ‘animal’ as incapable of being otherwise, opinion the 
apprehension of ‘animal’ as capable of being otherwise – e.g. the 
apprehension that animal is an element in the essential nature 
of man is knowledge; the apprehension of animal as predicable 
of man but not as an element in man’s essential nature is 
opinion: man is the subject in both judgements, but the mode 
of inherence differs. 

This also shows that one cannot opine and know the same 
thing simultaneously; for then one would apprehend the same 
thing as both capable and incapable of being otherwise – an 
impossibility. Knowledge and opinion of the same thing can coexist 
in two different people in the sense we have explained, 
but not simultaneously in the same person. That would involve 
a man’s simultaneously apprehending, e.g. (1) that man is 
essentially animal – i.e. cannot be other than animal – and (2) 


that man is not essentially animal, that is, we may assume, may 
be other than animal. 

Further consideration of modes of thinking and their 
distribution under the heads of discursive thought, intuition, 
science, art, practical wisdom, and metaphysical thinking, 
belongs rather partly to natural science, partly to moral 
philosophy. 

Quick wit is a faculty of hitting upon the middle term 
instantaneously. It would be exemplified by a man who saw 
that the moon has her bright side always turned towards the 
sun, and quickly grasped the cause of this, namely that she 
borrows her light from him; or observed somebody in 
conversation with a man of wealth and divined that he was 
borrowing money, or that the friendship of these people sprang 
from a common enmity. In all these instances he has seen the 
major and minor terms and then grasped the causes, the 
middle terms. 

Let A represent ‘bright side turned sunward’, B ‘lighted from the 
sun’, C the moon. Then B, ‘lighted from the sun’ is predicable of 
C, the moon, and A, ‘having her bright side towards the source 
of her light’, is predicable of B. So A is predicable of C through B. 


Book II 


The kinds of question we ask are as many as the kinds of things 
which we know. They are in fact four: – (1) whether the 
connexion of an attribute with a thing is a fact, (2) what is the 
reason of the connexion, (3) whether a thing exists, (4) What is 
the nature of the thing. Thus, when our question concerns a 
complex of thing and attribute and we ask whether the thing is 
thus or otherwise qualified – whether, e.g. the sun suffers 
eclipse or not – then we are asking as to the fact of a connexion. 
That our inquiry ceases with the discovery that the sun does 
suffer eclipse is an indication of this; and if we know from the 
start that the sun suffers eclipse, we do not inquire whether it 
does so or not. On the other hand, when we know the fact we 
ask the reason; as, for example, when we know that the sun is 
being eclipsed and that an earthquake is in progress, it is the 
reason of eclipse or earthquake into which we inquire. 

Where a complex is concerned, then, those are the two 
questions we ask; but for some objects of inquiry we have a 
different kind of question to ask, such as whether there is or is 
not a centaur or a God. (By ‘is or is not’ I mean ‘is or is not, 
without further qualification’; as opposed to ‘is or is not [e.g.] 
white’.) On the other hand, when we have ascertained the 
thing’s existence, we inquire as to its nature, asking, for 
instance, ‘what, then, is God?’ or ‘what is man?’. 


These, then, are the four kinds of question we ask, and it is in 
the answers to these questions that our knowledge consists. 

Now when we ask whether a connexion is a fact, or whether a 
thing without qualification is, we are really asking whether the 
connexion or the thing has a ‘middle’; and when we have 
ascertained either that the connexion is a fact or that the thing 
is – i.e. ascertained either the partial or the unqualified being of 
the thing-and are proceeding to ask the reason of the connexion 
or the nature of the thing, then we are asking what the ‘middle’ 
is. 

(By distinguishing the fact of the connexion and the existence 
of the thing as respectively the partial and the unqualified being 
of the thing, I mean that if we ask ‘does the moon suffer 
eclipse?’, or ‘does the moon wax?’, the question concerns a part 
of the thing’s being; for what we are asking in such questions is 
whether a thing is this or that, i.e. has or has not this or that 
attribute: whereas, if we ask whether the moon or night exists, 
the question concerns the unqualified being of a thing.) 

We conclude that in all our inquiries we are asking either 
whether there is a ‘middle’ or what the ‘middle’ is: for the 
‘middle’ here is precisely the cause, and it is the cause that we 
seek in all our inquiries. Thus, ‘Does the moon suffer eclipse?’ 
means ‘Is there or is there not a cause producing eclipse of the 
moon?’, and when we have learnt that there is, our next 
question is, ‘What, then, is this cause? for the cause through 
which a thing is – not is this or that, i.e. has this or that 
attribute, but without qualification is – and the cause through 
which it is – not is without qualification, but is this or that as 
having some essential attribute or some accident – are both 
alike the middle’. By that which is without qualification I mean 
the subject, e.g. moon or earth or sun or triangle; by that which 


a subject is (in the partial sense) I mean a property, e.g. eclipse, 
equality or inequality, interposition or non-interposition. For in 
all these examples it is clear that the nature of the thing and 
the reason of the fact are identical: the question ‘What is 
eclipse?’ and its answer ‘The privation of the moon’s light by the 
interposition of the earth’ are identical with the question ‘What 
is the reason of eclipse?’ or ‘Why does the moon suffer eclipse?’ 
and the reply ‘Because of the failure of light through the earth’s 
shutting it out’. Again, for ‘What is a concord? A commensurate 
numerical ratio of a high and a low note’, we may substitute 
‘What ratio makes a high and a low note concordant? Their 
relation according to a commensurate numerical ratio.’ ‘Are the 
high and the low note concordant?’ is equivalent to ‘Is their 
ratio commensurate?’; and when we find that it is 
commensurate, we ask ‘What, then, is their ratio?’. 

Cases in which the ‘middle’ is sensible show that the object of 
our inquiry is always the ‘middle’: we inquire, because we have 
not perceived it, whether there is or is not a ‘middle’ causing, 

e.g. an eclipse. On the other hand, if we were on the moon we 
should not be inquiring either as to the fact or the reason, but 
both fact and reason would be obvious simultaneously. For the 
act of perception would have enabled us to know the universal 
too; since, the present fact of an eclipse being evident, 
perception would then at the same time give us the present fact 
of the earth’s screening the sun’s light, and from this would 
arise the universal. 
Thus, as we maintain, to know a thing’s nature is to know the 
reason why it is; and this is equally true of things in so far as 
they are said without qualification to he as opposed to being 
possessed of some attribute, and in so far as they are said to be 
possessed of some attribute such as equal to right angles, or 
greater or less. 


It is clear, then, that all questions are a search for a ‘middle’. Let 
us now state how essential nature is revealed and in what way 
it can be reduced to demonstration; what definition is, and 
what things are definable. And let us first discuss certain 
difficulties which these questions raise, beginning what we 
have to say with a point most intimately connected with our 
immediately preceding remarks, namely the doubt that might 
be felt as to whether or not it is possible to know the same thing 
in the same relation, both by definition and by demonstration. It 
might, I mean, be urged that definition is held to concern 
essential nature and is in every case universal and affirmative; 
whereas, on the other hand, some conclusions are negative and 
some are not universal; e.g. all in the second figure are negative, 
none in the third are universal. And again, not even all 
affirmative conclusions in the first figure are definable, e.g. 
‘every triangle has its angles equal to two right angles’. An 
argument proving this difference between demonstration and 
definition is that to have scientific knowledge of the 
demonstrable is identical with possessing a demonstration of it: 
hence if demonstration of such conclusions as these is possible, 
there clearly cannot also be definition of them. If there could, 
one might know such a conclusion also in virtue of its 
definition without possessing the demonstration of it; for there 
is nothing to stop our having the one without the other. 

Induction too will sufficiently convince us of this difference; for 
never yet by defining anything – essential attribute or accident – 
did we get knowledge of it. Again, if to define is to acquire 
knowledge of a substance, at any rate such attributes are not 
substances. 


It is evident, then, that not everything demonstrable can be 
defined. What then? Can everything definable be demonstrated, 
or not? There is one of our previous arguments which covers 
this too. Of a single thing qua single there is a single scientific 
knowledge. Hence, since to know the demonstrable 
scientifically is to possess the demonstration of it, an 
impossible consequence will follow: – possession of its 
definition without its demonstration will give knowledge of the 
demonstrable. 

Moreover, the basic premisses of demonstrations are 
definitions, and it has already been shown that these will be 
found indemonstrable; either the basic premisses will be 
demonstrable and will depend on prior premisses, and the 
regress will be endless; or the primary truths will be 
indemonstrable definitions. 

But if the definable and the demonstrable are not wholly the 
same, may they yet be partially the same? Or is that impossible, 
because there can be no demonstration of the definable? There 
can be none, because definition is of the essential nature or 
being of something, and all demonstrations evidently posit and 
assume the essential nature – mathematical demonstrations, 
for example, the nature of unity and the odd, and all the other 
sciences likewise. Moreover, every demonstration proves a 
predicate of a subject as attaching or as not attaching to it, but 
in definition one thing is not predicated of another; we do not, 

e.g. predicate animal of biped nor biped of animal, nor yet figure 
of plane – plane not being figure nor figure plane. Again, to 
prove essential nature is not the same as to prove the fact of a 
connexion. Now definition reveals essential nature, 
demonstration reveals that a given attribute attaches or does 
not attach to a given subject; but different things require 
different demonstrations – unless the one demonstration is 
related to the other as part to whole. I add this because if all 

triangles have been proved to possess angles equal to two right 
angles, then this attribute has been proved to attach to 
isosceles; for isosceles is a part of which all triangles constitute 
the whole. But in the case before us the fact and the essential 
nature are not so related to one another, since the one is not a 
part of the other. 

So it emerges that not all the definable is demonstrable nor all 
the demonstrable definable; and we may draw the general 
conclusion that there is no identical object of which it is 
possible to possess both a definition and a demonstration. It 
follows obviously that definition and demonstration are neither 
identical nor contained either within the other: if they were, 
their objects would be related either as identical or as whole 
and part. 

So much, then, for the first stage of our problem. The next step 
is to raise the question whether syllogism – i.e. demonstration – 
of the definable nature is possible or, as our recent argument 
assumed, impossible. 

We might argue it impossible on the following grounds: – (a) 
syllogism proves an attribute of a subject through the middle 
term; on the other hand (b) its definable nature is both ‘peculiar’ 
to a subject and predicated of it as belonging to its essence. But 
in that case (1) the subject, its definition, and the middle term 
connecting them must be reciprocally predicable of one 
another; for if A is to C, obviously A is ‘peculiar’ to B and B to C – 
in fact all three terms are ‘peculiar’ to one another: and further 

(2) if A inheres in the essence of all B and B is predicated 

universally of all C as belonging to C’s essence, A also must be 
predicated of C as belonging to its essence. 

If one does not take this relation as thus duplicated – if, that is, 
A is predicated as being of the essence of B, but B is not of the 
essence of the subjects of which it is predicated – A will not 
necessarily be predicated of C as belonging to its essence. So 
both premisses will predicate essence, and consequently B also 
will be predicated of C as its essence. Since, therefore, both 
premisses do predicate essence – i.e. definable form – C’s 
definable form will appear in the middle term before the 
conclusion is drawn. 

We may generalize by supposing that it is possible to prove the 
essential nature of man. Let C be man, A man’s essential nature 

– two-footed animal, or aught else it may be. Then, if we are to 
syllogize, A must be predicated of all B. But this premiss will be 
mediated by a fresh definition, which consequently will also be 
the essential nature of man. Therefore the argument assumes 
what it has to prove, since B too is the essential nature of man. 
It is, however, the case in which there are only the two 
premisses – i.e. in which the premisses are primary and 
immediate – which we ought to investigate, because it best 
illustrates the point under discussion. 
Thus they who prove the essential nature of soul or man or 
anything else through reciprocating terms beg the question. It 
would be begging the question, for example, to contend that the 
soul is that which causes its own life, and that what causes its 
own life is a self-moving number; for one would have to 
postulate that the soul is a self-moving number in the sense of 
being identical with it. For if A is predicable as a mere 
consequent of B and B of C, A will not on that account be the 
definable form of C: A will merely be what it was true to say of 

C. Even if A is predicated of all B inasmuch as B is identical with 

a species of A, still it will not follow: being an animal is 
predicated of being a man – since it is true that in all instances 
to be human is to be animal, just as it is also true that every 
man is an animal – but not as identical with being man. 

We conclude, then, that unless one takes both the premisses as 
predicating essence, one cannot infer that A is the definable 
form and essence of C: but if one does so take them, in 
assuming B one will have assumed, before drawing the 
conclusion, what the definable form of C is; so that there has 
been no inference, for one has begged the question. 

Nor, as was said in my formal logic, is the method of division a 
process of inference at all, since at no point does the 
characterization of the subject follow necessarily from the 
premising of certain other facts: division demonstrates as little 
as does induction. For in a genuine demonstration the 
conclusion must not be put as a question nor depend on a 
concession, but must follow necessarily from its premisses, 
even if the respondent deny it. The definer asks ‘Is man animal 
or inanimate?’ and then assumes – he has not inferred – that 
man is animal. Next, when presented with an exhaustive 
division of animal into terrestrial and aquatic, he assumes that 
man is terrestrial. Moreover, that man is the complete formula, 
terrestrial-animal, does not follow necessarily from the 
premisses: this too is an assumption, and equally an 
assumption whether the division comprises many differentiae 
or few. (Indeed as this method of division is used by those who 
proceed by it, even truths that can be inferred actually fail to 
appear as such.) For why should not the whole of this formula 


be true of man, and yet not exhibit his essential nature or 
definable form? Again, what guarantee is there against an 
unessential addition, or against the omission of the final or of 
an intermediate determinant of the substantial being? 

The champion of division might here urge that though these 
lapses do occur, yet we can solve that difficulty if all the 
attributes we assume are constituents of the definable form, 
and if, postulating the genus, we produce by division the 
requisite uninterrupted sequence of terms, and omit nothing; 
and that indeed we cannot fail to fulfil these conditions if what 
is to be divided falls whole into the division at each stage, and 
none of it is omitted; and that this – the dividendum – must 
without further question be (ultimately) incapable of fresh 
specific division. Nevertheless, we reply, division does not 
involve inference; if it gives knowledge, it gives it in another 
way. Nor is there any absurdity in this: induction, perhaps, is 
not demonstration any more than is division, et it does make 
evident some truth. Yet to state a definition reached by division 
is not to state a conclusion: as, when conclusions are drawn 
without their appropriate middles, the alleged necessity by 
which the inference follows from the premisses is open to a 
question as to the reason for it, so definitions reached by 
division invite the same question. 

Thus to the question ‘What is the essential nature of man?’ the 
divider replies ‘Animal, mortal, footed, biped, wingless’; and 
when at each step he is asked ‘Why?’, he will say, and, as he 
thinks, proves by division, that all animal is mortal or immortal: 
but such a formula taken in its entirety is not definition; so that 
even if division does demonstrate its formula, definition at any 
rate does not turn out to be a conclusion of inference. 


Can we nevertheless actually demonstrate what a thing 
essentially and substantially is, but hypothetically, i.e. by 
premising (1) that its definable form is constituted by the 
‘peculiar’ attributes of its essential nature; (2) that such and 
such are the only attributes of its essential nature, and that the 
complete synthesis of them is peculiar to the thing; and thus – 
since in this synthesis consists the being of the thing – 
obtaining our conclusion? Or is the truth that, since proof must 
be through the middle term, the definable form is once more 
assumed in this minor premiss too? 

Further, just as in syllogizing we do not premise what syllogistic 
inference is (since the premisses from which we conclude must 
be related as whole and part), so the definable form must not 
fall within the syllogism but remain outside the premisses 
posited. It is only against a doubt as to its having been a 
syllogistic inference at all that we have to defend our argument 
as conforming to the definition of syllogism. It is only when 
some one doubts whether the conclusion proved is the 
definable form that we have to defend it as conforming to the 
definition of definable form which we assumed. Hence 
syllogistic inference must be possible even without the express 
statement of what syllogism is or what definable form is. 

The following type of hypothetical proof also begs the question. 
If evil is definable as the divisible, and the definition of a thing’s 
contrary – if it has one the contrary of the thing’s definition; 
then, if good is the contrary of evil and the indivisible of the 
divisible, we conclude that to be good is essentially to be 
indivisible. The question is begged because definable form is 
assumed as a premiss, and as a premiss which is to prove 
definable form. ‘But not the same definable form’, you may 
object. That I admit, for in demonstrations also we premise that 


‘this’ is predicable of ‘that’; but in this premiss the term we 
assert of the minor is neither the major itself nor a term 
identical in definition, or convertible, with the major. 

Again, both proof by division and the syllogism just described 
are open to the question why man should be animal-bipedterrestrial 
and not merely animal and terrestrial, since what 
they premise does not ensure that the predicates shall 
constitute a genuine unity and not merely belong to a single 
subject as do musical and grammatical when predicated of the 
same man. 

How then by definition shall we prove substance or essential 
nature? We cannot show it as a fresh fact necessarily following 
from the assumption of premisses admitted to be facts – the 
method of demonstration: we may not proceed as by induction 
to establish a universal on the evidence of groups of particulars 
which offer no exception, because induction proves not what 
the essential nature of a thing is but that it has or has not some 
attribute. Therefore, since presumably one cannot prove 
essential nature by an appeal to sense perception or by pointing 
with the finger, what other method remains? 

To put it another way: how shall we by definition prove 
essential nature? He who knows what human – or any other – 
nature is, must know also that man exists; for no one knows the 
nature of what does not exist – one can know the meaning of 
the phrase or name ‘goat-stag’ but not what the essential 
nature of a goat-stag is. But further, if definition can prove what 
is the essential nature of a thing, can it also prove that it exists? 
And how will it prove them both by the same process, since 


definition exhibits one single thing and demonstration another 
single thing, and what human nature is and the fact that man 
exists are not the same thing? Then too we hold that it is by 
demonstration that the being of everything must be proved – 
unless indeed to be were its essence; and, since being is not a 
genus, it is not the essence of anything. Hence the being of 
anything as fact is matter for demonstration; and this is the 
actual procedure of the sciences, for the geometer assumes the 
meaning of the word triangle, but that it is possessed of some 
attribute he proves. What is it, then, that we shall prove in 
defining essential nature? Triangle? In that case a man will 
know by definition what a thing’s nature is without knowing 
whether it exists. But that is impossible. 

Moreover it is clear, if we consider the methods of defining 
actually in use, that definition does not prove that the thing 
defined exists: since even if there does actually exist something 
which is equidistant from a centre, yet why should the thing 
named in the definition exist? Why, in other words, should this 
be the formula defining circle? One might equally well call it the 
definition of mountain copper. For definitions do not carry a 
further guarantee that the thing defined can exist or that it is 
what they claim to define: one can always ask why. 

Since, therefore, to define is to prove either a thing’s essential 
nature or the meaning of its name, we may conclude that 
definition, if it in no sense proves essential nature, is a set of 
words signifying precisely what a name signifies. But that were 
a strange consequence; for (1) both what is not substance and 
what does not exist at all would be definable, since even non-
existents can be signified by a name: (2) all sets of words or 
sentences would be definitions, since any kind of sentence 
could be given a name; so that we should all be talking in 
definitions, and even the Iliad would be a definition: (3) no 
demonstration can prove that any particular name means any 


particular thing: neither, therefore, do definitions, in addition to 
revealing the meaning of a name, also reveal that the name has 
this meaning. It appears then from these considerations that 
neither definition and syllogism nor their objects are identical, 
and further that definition neither demonstrates nor proves 
anything, and that knowledge of essential nature is not to be 
obtained either by definition or by demonstration. 

We must now start afresh and consider which of these 
conclusions are sound and which are not, and what is the 
nature of definition, and whether essential nature is in any 
sense demonstrable and definable or in none. 

Now to know its essential nature is, as we said, the same as to 
know the cause of a thing’s existence, and the proof of this 
depends on the fact that a thing must have a cause. Moreover, 
this cause is either identical with the essential nature of the 
thing or distinct from it; and if its cause is distinct from it, the 
essential nature of the thing is either demonstrable or 
indemonstrable. Consequently, if the cause is distinct from the 
thing’s essential nature and demonstration is possible, the 
cause must be the middle term, and, the conclusion proved 
being universal and affirmative, the proof is in the first figure. 
So the method just examined of proving it through another 
essential nature would be one way of proving essential nature, 
because a conclusion containing essential nature must be 
inferred through a middle which is an essential nature just as a 
‘peculiar’ property must be inferred through a middle which is a 
‘peculiar’ property; so that of the two definable natures of a 
single thing this method will prove one and not the other. 


Now it was said before that this method could not amount to 
demonstration of essential nature – it is actually a dialectical 
proof of it – so let us begin again and explain by what method it 
can be demonstrated. When we are aware of a fact we seek its 
reason, and though sometimes the fact and the reason dawn on 
us simultaneously, yet we cannot apprehend the reason a 
moment sooner than the fact; and clearly in just the same way 
we cannot apprehend a thing’s definable form without 
apprehending that it exists, since while we are ignorant 
whether it exists we cannot know its essential nature. Moreover 
we are aware whether a thing exists or not sometimes through 
apprehending an element in its character, and sometimes 
accidentally, as, for example, when we are aware of thunder as a 
noise in the clouds, of eclipse as a privation of light, or of man 
as some species of animal, or of the soul as a self-moving thing. 
As often as we have accidental knowledge that the thing exists, 
we must be in a wholly negative state as regards awareness of 
its essential nature; for we have not got genuine knowledge 
even of its existence, and to search for a thing’s essential nature 
when we are unaware that it exists is to search for nothing. On 
the other hand, whenever we apprehend an element in the 
thing’s character there is less difficulty. Thus it follows that the 
degree of our knowledge of a thing’s essential nature is 
determined by the sense in which we are aware that it exists. 
Let us then take the following as our first instance of being 
aware of an element in the essential nature. Let A be eclipse, C 
the moon, B the earth’s acting as a screen. Now to ask whether 
the moon is eclipsed or not is to ask whether or not B has 
occurred. But that is precisely the same as asking whether A has 
a defining condition; and if this condition actually exists, we 
assert that A also actually exists. Or again we may ask which 
side of a contradiction the defining condition necessitates: does 
it make the angles of a triangle equal or not equal to two right 
angles? When we have found the answer, if the premisses are 


immediate, we know fact and reason together; if they are not 
immediate, we know the fact without the reason, as in the 
following example: let C be the moon, A eclipse, B the fact that 
the moon fails to produce shadows though she is full and 
though no visible body intervenes between us and her. Then if 
B, failure to produce shadows in spite of the absence of an 
intervening body, is attributable A to C, and eclipse, is 
attributable to B, it is clear that the moon is eclipsed, but the 
reason why is not yet clear, and we know that eclipse exists, but 
we do not know what its essential nature is. But when it is clear 
that A is attributable to C and we proceed to ask the reason of 
this fact, we are inquiring what is the nature of B: is it the 
earth’s acting as a screen, or the moon’s rotation or her 
extinction? But B is the definition of the other term, viz. in these 
examples, of the major term A; for eclipse is constituted by the 
earth acting as a screen. Thus, (1) ‘What is thunder?’ ‘The 
quenching of fire in cloud’, and (2) ‘Why does it thunder?’ 
‘Because fire is quenched in the cloud’, are equivalent. Let C be 
cloud, A thunder, B the quenching of fire. Then B is attributable 
to C, cloud, since fire is quenched in it; and A, noise, is 
attributable to B; and B is assuredly the definition of the major 
term A. If there be a further mediating cause of B, it will be one 
of the remaining partial definitions of A. 

We have stated then how essential nature is discovered and 
becomes known, and we see that, while there is no syllogism – 

i.e. no demonstrative syllogism – of essential nature, yet it is 
through syllogism, viz. demonstrative syllogism, that essential 
nature is exhibited. So we conclude that neither can the 
essential nature of anything which has a cause distinct from 
itself be known without demonstration, nor can it be 
demonstrated; and this is what we contended in our 
preliminary discussions. 

Now while some things have a cause distinct from themselves, 
others have not. Hence it is evident that there are essential 
natures which are immediate, that is are basic premisses; and 
of these not only that they are but also what they are must be 
assumed or revealed in some other way. This too is the actual 
procedure of the arithmetician, who assumes both the nature 
and the existence of unit. On the other hand, it is possible (in 
the manner explained) to exhibit through demonstration the 
essential nature of things which have a ‘middle’, i.e. a cause of 
their substantial being other than that being itself; but we do 
not thereby demonstrate it. 

Since definition is said to be the statement of a thing’s nature, 
obviously one kind of definition will be a statement of the 
meaning of the name, or of an equivalent nominal formula. A 
definition in this sense tells you, e.g. the meaning of the phrase 
‘triangular character’. When we are aware that triangle exists, 
we inquire the reason why it exists. But it is difficult thus to 
learn the definition of things the existence of which we do not 
genuinely know – the cause of this difficulty being, as we said 
before, that we only know accidentally whether or not the thing 
exists. Moreover, a statement may be a unity in either of two 
ways, by conjunction, like the Iliad, or because it exhibits a 
single predicate as inhering not accidentally in a single subject. 

That then is one way of defining definition. Another kind of 
definition is a formula exhibiting the cause of a thing’s 


existence. Thus the former signifies without proving, but the 
latter will clearly be a quasi-demonstration of essential nature, 
differing from demonstration in the arrangement of its terms. 
For there is a difference between stating why it thunders, and 
stating what is the essential nature of thunder; since the first 
statement will be ‘Because fire is quenched in the clouds’, while 
the statement of what the nature of thunder is will be ‘The 
noise of fire being quenched in the clouds’. Thus the same 
statement takes a different form: in one form it is continuous 
demonstration, in the other definition. Again, thunder can be 
defined as noise in the clouds, which is the conclusion of the 
demonstration embodying essential nature. On the other hand 
the definition of immediates is an indemonstrable positing of 
essential nature. 

We conclude then that definition is (a) an indemonstrable 
statement of essential nature, or (b) a syllogism of essential 
nature differing from demonstration in grammatical form, or (c) 
the conclusion of a demonstration giving essential nature. 

Our discussion has therefore made plain (1) in what sense and 
of what things the essential nature is demonstrable, and in 
what sense and of what things it is not; (2) what are the various 
meanings of the term definition, and in what sense and of what 
things it proves the essential nature, and in what sense and of 
what things it does not; (3) what is the relation of definition to 
demonstration, and how far the same thing is both definable 
and demonstrable and how far it is not. 

We think we have scientific knowledge when we know the 
cause, and there are four causes: (1) the definable form, (2) an 



antecedent which necessitates a consequent, (3) the efficient 
cause, (4) the final cause. Hence each of these can be the middle 
term of a proof, for (a) though the inference from antecedent to 
necessary consequent does not hold if only one premiss is 
assumed – two is the minimum – still when there are two it 
holds on condition that they have a single common middle 
term. So it is from the assumption of this single middle term 
that the conclusion follows necessarily. The following example 
will also show this. Why is the angle in a semicircle a right 
angle? – or from what assumption does it follow that it is a right 
angle? Thus, let A be right angle, B the half of two right angles, C 
the angle in a semicircle. Then B is the cause in virtue of which 
A, right angle, is attributable to C, the angle in a semicircle, 
since B=A and the other, viz. C,=B, for C is half of two right 
angles. Therefore it is the assumption of B, the half of two right 
angles, from which it follows that A is attributable to C, i.e. that 
the angle in a semicircle is a right angle. Moreover, B is identical 
with (b) the defining form of A, since it is what A’s definition 
signifies. Moreover, the formal cause has already been shown to 
be the middle. (c) ‘Why did the Athenians become involved in 
the Persian war?’ means ‘What cause originated the waging of 
war against the Athenians?’ and the answer is, ‘Because they 
raided Sardis with the Eretrians’, since this originated the war. 
Let A be war, B unprovoked raiding, C the Athenians. Then B, 
unprovoked raiding, is true of C, the Athenians, and A is true of 
B, since men make war on the unjust aggressor. So A, having 
war waged upon them, is true of B, the initial aggressors, and B 
is true of C, the Athenians, who were the aggressors. Hence here 
too the cause – in this case the efficient cause – is the middle 
term. (d) This is no less true where the cause is the final cause. 

E.g. why does one take a walk after supper? For the sake of one’s 
health. Why does a house exist? For the preservation of one’s 
goods. The end in view is in the one case health, in the other 
preservation. To ask the reason why one must walk after supper 

is precisely to ask to what end one must do it. Let C be walking 
after supper, B the non-regurgitation of food, A health. Then let 
walking after supper possess the property of preventing food 
from rising to the orifice of the stomach, and let this condition 
be healthy; since it seems that B, the non-regurgitation of food, 
is attributable to C, taking a walk, and that A, health, is 
attributable to B. What, then, is the cause through which A, the 
final cause, inheres in C? It is B, the non-regurgitation of food; 
but B is a kind of definition of A, for A will be explained by it. 
Why is B the cause of A’s belonging to C? Because to be in a 
condition such as B is to be in health. The definitions must be 
transposed, and then the detail will become clearer. 
Incidentally, here the order of coming to be is the reverse of 
what it is in proof through the efficient cause: in the efficient 
order the middle term must come to be first, whereas in the 
teleological order the minor, C, must first take place, and the 
end in view comes last in time. 

The same thing may exist for an end and be necessitated as 
well. For example, light shines through a lantern (1) because 
that which consists of relatively small particles necessarily 
passes through pores larger than those particles – assuming 
that light does issue by penetration – and (2) for an end, namely 
to save us from stumbling. If then, a thing can exist through two 
causes, can it come to be through two causes – as for instance if 
thunder be a hiss and a roar necessarily produced by the 
quenching of fire, and also designed, as the Pythagoreans say, 
for a threat to terrify those that lie in Tartarus? Indeed, there are 
very many such cases, mostly among the processes and 
products of the natural world; for nature, in different senses of 
the term ‘nature’, produces now for an end, now by necessity. 

Necessity too is of two kinds. It may work in accordance with a 
thing’s natural tendency, or by constraint and in opposition to it; 



as, for instance, by necessity a stone is borne both upwards and 
downwards, but not by the same necessity. 

Of the products of man’s intelligence some are never due to 
chance or necessity but always to an end, as for example a 
house or a statue; others, such as health or safety, may result 
from chance as well. 

It is mostly in cases where the issue is indeterminate (though 
only where the production does not originate in chance, and the 
end is consequently good), that a result is due to an end, and 
this is true alike in nature or in art. By chance, on the other 
hand, nothing comes to be for an end. 

The effect may be still coming to be, or its occurrence may be 
past or future, yet the cause will be the same as when it is 
actually existent – for it is the middle which is the cause – 
except that if the effect actually exists the cause is actually 
existent, if it is coming to be so is the cause, if its occurrence is 
past the cause is past, if future the cause is future. For example, 
the moon was eclipsed because the earth intervened, is 
becoming eclipsed because the earth is in process of 
intervening, will be eclipsed because the earth will intervene, is 
eclipsed because the earth intervenes. 

To take a second example: assuming that the definition of ice is 
solidified water, let C be water, A solidified, B the middle, which 
is the cause, namely total failure of heat. Then B is attributed to 
C, and A, solidification, to B: ice when B is occurring, has formed 
when B has occurred, and will form when B shall occur. 


This sort of cause, then, and its effect come to be 
simultaneously when they are in process of becoming, and exist 
simultaneously when they actually exist; and the same holds 
good when they are past and when they are future. But what of 
cases where they are not simultaneous? Can causes and effects 
different from one another form, as they seem to us to form, a 
continuous succession, a past effect resulting from a past cause 
different from itself, a future effect from a future cause different 
from it, and an effect which is coming-to-be from a cause 
different from and prior to it? Now on this theory it is from the 
posterior event that we reason (and this though these later 
events actually have their source of origin in previous events – a 
fact which shows that also when the effect is coming-to-be we 
still reason from the posterior event), and from the event we 
cannot reason (we cannot argue that because an event A has 
occurred, therefore an event B has occurred subsequently to A 
but still in the past – and the same holds good if the occurrence 
is future) – cannot reason because, be the time interval definite 
or indefinite, it will never be possible to infer that because it is 
true to say that A occurred, therefore it is true to say that B, the 
subsequent event, occurred; for in the interval between the 
events, though A has already occurred, the latter statement will 
be false. And the same argument applies also to future events; 

i.e. one cannot infer from an event which occurred in the past 
that a future event will occur. The reason of this is that the 
middle must be homogeneous, past when the extremes are 
past, future when they are future, coming to be when they are 
coming-to-be, actually existent when they are actually existent; 
and there cannot be a middle term homogeneous with 
extremes respectively past and future. And it is a further 
difficulty in this theory that the time interval can be neither 
indefinite nor definite, since during it the inference will be false. 
We have also to inquire what it is that holds events together so 
that the coming-to-be now occurring in actual things follows 

upon a past event. It is evident, we may suggest, that a past 
event and a present process cannot be ‘contiguous’, for not even 
two past events can be ‘contiguous’. For past events are limits 
and atomic; so just as points are not ‘contiguous’ neither are 
past events, since both are indivisible. For the same reason a 
past event and a present process cannot be ‘contiguous’, for the 
process is divisible, the event indivisible. Thus the relation of 
present process to past event is analogous to that of line to 
point, since a process contains an infinity of past events. These 
questions, however, must receive a more explicit treatment in 
our general theory of change. 

The following must suffice as an account of the manner in 
which the middle would be identical with the cause on the 
supposition that coming-to-be is a series of consecutive events: 
for in the terms of such a series too the middle and major terms 
must form an immediate premiss; e.g. we argue that, since C 
has occurred, therefore A occurred: and C’s occurrence was 
posterior, A’s prior; but C is the source of the inference because 
it is nearer to the present moment, and the starting-point of 
time is the present. We next argue that, since D has occurred, 
therefore C occurred. Then we conclude that, since D has 
occurred, therefore A must have occurred; and the cause is C, 
for since D has occurred C must have occurred, and since C has 
occurred A must previously have occurred. 

If we get our middle term in this way, will the series terminate 
in an immediate premiss, or since, as we said, no two events are 
‘contiguous’, will a fresh middle term always intervene because 
there is an infinity of middles? No: though no two events are 
‘contiguous’, yet we must start from a premiss consisting of a 
middle and the present event as major. The like is true of future 
events too, since if it is true to say that D will exist, it must be a 
prior truth to say that A will exist, and the cause of this 
conclusion is C; for if D will exist, C will exist prior to D, and if C 


will exist, A will exist prior to it. And here too the same infinite 
divisibility might be urged, since future events are not 
‘contiguous’. But here too an immediate basic premiss must be 
assumed. And in the world of fact this is so: if a house has been 
built, then blocks must have been quarried and shaped. The 
reason is that a house having been built necessitates a 
foundation having been laid, and if a foundation has been laid 
blocks must have been shaped beforehand. Again, if a house 
will be built, blocks will similarly be shaped beforehand; and 
proof is through the middle in the same way, for the foundation 
will exist before the house. 

Now we observe in Nature a certain kind of circular process of 
coming-to-be; and this is possible only if the middle and 
extreme terms are reciprocal, since conversion is conditioned by 
reciprocity in the terms of the proof. This – the convertibility of 
conclusions and premisses – has been proved in our early 
chapters, and the circular process is an instance of this. In 
actual fact it is exemplified thus: when the earth had been 
moistened an exhalation was bound to rise, and when an 
exhalation had risen cloud was bound to form, and from the 
formation of cloud rain necessarily resulted and by the fall of 
rain the earth was necessarily moistened: but this was the 
starting-point, so that a circle is completed; for posit any one of 
the terms and another follows from it, and from that another, 
and from that again the first. 

Some occurrences are universal (for they are, or come-to-be 
what they are, always and in ever case); others again are not 
always what they are but only as a general rule: for instance, 
not every man can grow a beard, but it is the general rule. In the 
case of such connexions the middle term too must be a general 
rule. For if A is predicated universally of B and B of C, A too must 
be predicated always and in every instance of C, since to hold in 
every instance and always is of the nature of the universal. But 


we have assumed a connexion which is a general rule; 
consequently the middle term B must also be a general rule. So 
connexions which embody a general rule – i.e. which exist or 
come to be as a general rule – will also derive from immediate 
basic premisses. 

We have already explained how essential nature is set out in 
the terms of a demonstration, and the sense in which it is or is 
not demonstrable or definable; so let us now discuss the 
method to be adopted in tracing the elements predicated as 
constituting the definable form. 

Now of the attributes which inhere always in each several thing 
there are some which are wider in extent than it but not wider 
than its genus (by attributes of wider extent mean all such as 
are universal attributes of each several subject, but in their 
application are not confined to that subject). while an attribute 
may inhere in every triad, yet also in a subject not a triad – as 
being inheres in triad but also in subjects not numbers at all – 
odd on the other hand is an attribute inhering in every triad and 
of wider application (inhering as it does also in pentad), but 
which does not extend beyond the genus of triad; for pentad is a 
number, but nothing outside number is odd. It is such attributes 
which we have to select, up to the exact point at which they are 
severally of wider extent than the subject but collectively 
coextensive with it; for this synthesis must be the substance of 
the thing. For example every triad possesses the attributes 
number, odd, and prime in both senses, i.e. not only as 
possessing no divisors, but also as not being a sum of numbers. 
This, then, is precisely what triad is, viz. a number, odd, and 


prime in the former and also the latter sense of the term: for 
these attributes taken severally apply, the first two to all odd 
numbers, the last to the dyad also as well as to the triad, but, 
taken collectively, to no other subject. Now since we have 
shown above’ that attributes predicated as belonging to the 
essential nature are necessary and that universals are 
necessary, and since the attributes which we select as inhering 
in triad, or in any other subject whose attributes we select in 
this way, are predicated as belonging to its essential nature, 
triad will thus possess these attributes necessarily. Further, that 
the synthesis of them constitutes the substance of triad is 
shown by the following argument. If it is not identical with the 
being of triad, it must be related to triad as a genus named or 
nameless. It will then be of wider extent than triad – assuming 
that wider potential extent is the character of a genus. If on the 
other hand this synthesis is applicable to no subject other than 
the individual triads, it will be identical with the being of triad, 
because we make the further assumption that the substance of 
each subject is the predication of elements in its essential 
nature down to the last differentia characterizing the 
individuals. It follows that any other synthesis thus exhibited 
will likewise be identical with the being of the subject. 

The author of a hand-book on a subject that is a generic whole 
should divide the genus into its first infimae species – number 

e.g. into triad and dyad – and then endeavour to seize their 
definitions by the method we have described – the definition, 
for example, of straight line or circle or right angle. After that, 
having established what the category is to which the subaltern 
genus belongs – quantity or quality, for instance – he should 
examine the properties ‘peculiar’ to the species, working 
through the proximate common differentiae. He should proceed 
thus because the attributes of the genera compounded of the 
infimae species will be clearly given by the definitions of the 
species; since the basic element of them all is the definition, i.e. 

the simple infirma species, and the attributes inhere essentially 
in the simple infimae species, in the genera only in virtue of 
these. 

Divisions according to differentiae are a useful accessory to this 
method. What force they have as proofs we did, indeed, explain 
above, but that merely towards collecting the essential nature 
they may be of use we will proceed to show. They might, indeed, 
seem to be of no use at all, but rather to assume everything at 
the start and to be no better than an initial assumption made 
without division. But, in fact, the order in which the attributes 
are predicated does make a difference – it matters whether we 
say animal-tame-biped, or biped-animal-tame. For if every 
definable thing consists of two elements and ‘animal-tame’ 
forms a unity, and again out of this and the further differentia 
man (or whatever else is the unity under construction) is 
constituted, then the elements we assume have necessarily 
been reached by division. Again, division is the only possible 
method of avoiding the omission of any element of the 
essential nature. Thus, if the primary genus is assumed and we 
then take one of the lower divisions, the dividendum will not 
fall whole into this division: e.g. it is not all animal which is 
either whole-winged or split-winged but all winged animal, for 
it is winged animal to which this differentiation belongs. The 
primary differentiation of animal is that within which all 
animal falls. The like is true of every other genus, whether 
outside animal or a subaltern genus of animal; e.g. the primary 
differentiation of bird is that within which falls every bird, of 
fish that within which falls every fish. So, if we proceed in this 
way, we can be sure that nothing has been omitted: by any 
other method one is bound to omit something without knowing 
it. 

To define and divide one need not know the whole of existence. 
Yet some hold it impossible to know the differentiae 


distinguishing each thing from every single other thing without 
knowing every single other thing; and one cannot, they say, 
know each thing without knowing its differentiae, since 
everything is identical with that from which it does not differ, 
and other than that from which it differs. Now first of all this is 
a fallacy: not every differentia precludes identity, since many 
differentiae inhere in things specifically identical, though not in 
the substance of these nor essentially. Secondly, when one has 
taken one’s differing pair of opposites and assumed that the 
two sides exhaust the genus, and that the subject one seeks to 
define is present in one or other of them, and one has further 
verified its presence in one of them; then it does not matter 
whether or not one knows all the other subjects of which the 
differentiae are also predicated. For it is obvious that when by 
this process one reaches subjects incapable of further 
differentiation one will possess the formula defining the 
substance. Moreover, to postulate that the division exhausts the 
genus is not illegitimate if the opposites exclude a middle; since 
if it is the differentia of that genus, anything contained in the 
genus must lie on one of the two sides. 

In establishing a definition by division one should keep three 
objects in view: (1) the admission only of elements in the 
definable form, (2) the arrangement of these in the right order, 

(3) the omission of no such elements. The first is feasible 
because one can establish genus and differentia through the 
topic of the genus, just as one can conclude the inherence of an 
accident through the topic of the accident. The right order will 
be achieved if the right term is assumed as primary, and this 
will be ensured if the term selected is predicable of all the 
others but not all they of it; since there must be one such term. 
Having assumed this we at once proceed in the same way with 
the lower terms; for our second term will be the first of the 
remainder, our third the first of those which follow the second 
in a ‘contiguous’ series, since when the higher term is excluded, 

that term of the remainder which is ‘contiguous’ to it will be 
primary, and so on. Our procedure makes it clear that no 
elements in the definable form have been omitted: we have 
taken the differentia that comes first in the order of division, 
pointing out that animal, e.g. is divisible exhaustively into A and 
B, and that the subject accepts one of the two as its predicate. 
Next we have taken the differentia of the whole thus reached, 
and shown that the whole we finally reach is not further 
divisible – i.e. that as soon as we have taken the last differentia 
to form the concrete totality, this totality admits of no division 
into species. For it is clear that there is no superfluous addition, 
since all these terms we have selected are elements in the 
definable form; and nothing lacking, since any omission would 
have to be a genus or a differentia. Now the primary term is a 
genus, and this term taken in conjunction with its differentiae 
is a genus: moreover the differentiae are all included, because 
there is now no further differentia; if there were, the final 
concrete would admit of division into species, which, we said, is 
not the case. 

To resume our account of the right method of investigation: We 
must start by observing a set of similar – i.e. specifically 
identical – individuals, and consider what element they have in 
common. We must then apply the same process to another set 
of individuals which belong to one species and are generically 
but not specifically identical with the former set. When we have 
established what the common element is in all members of this 
second species, and likewise in members of further species, we 
should again consider whether the results established possess 
any identity, and persevere until we reach a single formula, 
since this will be the definition of the thing. But if we reach not 
one formula but two or more, evidently the definiendum cannot 
be one thing but must be more than one. I may illustrate my 
meaning as follows. If we were inquiring what the essential 
nature of pride is, we should examine instances of proud men 


we know of to see what, as such, they have in common; e.g. if 
Alcibiades was proud, or Achilles and Ajax were proud, we 
should find on inquiring what they all had in common, that it 
was intolerance of insult; it was this which drove Alcibiades to 
war, Achilles wrath, and Ajax to suicide. We should next 
examine other cases, Lysander, for example, or Socrates, and 
then if these have in common indifference alike to good and ill 
fortune, I take these two results and inquire what common 
element have equanimity amid the vicissitudes of life and 
impatience of dishonour. If they have none, there will be two 
genera of pride. Besides, every definition is always universal and 
commensurate: the physician does not prescribe what is 
healthy for a single eye, but for all eyes or for a determinate 
species of eye. It is also easier by this method to define the 
single species than the universal, and that is why our procedure 
should be from the several species to the universal genera – this 
for the further reason too that equivocation is less readily 
detected in genera than in infimae species. Indeed, perspicuity 
is essential in definitions, just as inferential movement is the 
minimum required in demonstrations; and we shall attain 
perspicuity if we can collect separately the definition of each 
species through the group of singulars which we have 
established e.g. the definition of similarity not unqualified but 
restricted to colours and to figures; the definition of acuteness, 
but only of sound – and so proceed to the common universal 
with a careful avoidance of equivocation. We may add that if 
dialectical disputation must not employ metaphors, clearly 
metaphors and metaphorical expressions are precluded in 
definition: otherwise dialectic would involve metaphors. 


In order to formulate the connexions we wish to prove we have 
to select our analyses and divisions. The method of selection 
consists in laying down the common genus of all our subjects of 
investigation – if e.g. they are animals, we lay down what the 
properties are which inhere in every animal. These established, 
we next lay down the properties essentially connected with the 
first of the remaining classes – e.g. if this first subgenus is bird, 
the essential properties of every bird – and so on, always 
characterizing the proximate subgenus. This will clearly at once 
enable us to say in virtue of what character the subgenera – 
man, e.g. or horse – possess their properties. Let A be animal, B 
the properties of every animal, C D E various species of animal. 
Then it is clear in virtue of what character B inheres in D – 
namely A – and that it inheres in C and E for the same reason: 
and throughout the remaining subgenera always the same rule 
applies. 

We are now taking our examples from the traditional class-
names, but we must not confine ourselves to considering these. 
We must collect any other common character which we 
observe, and then consider with what species it is connected 
and what.properties belong to it. For example, as the common 
properties of horned animals we collect the possession of a 
third stomach and only one row of teeth. Then since it is clear 
in virtue of what character they possess these attributes – 
namely their horned character – the next question is, to what 
species does the possession of horns attach? 

Yet a further method of selection is by analogy: for we cannot 
find a single identical name to give to a squid’s pounce, a fish’s 
spine, and an animal’s bone, although these too possess 
common properties as if there were a single osseous nature. 


Some connexions that require proof are identical in that they 
possess an identical ‘middle’ e.g. a whole group might be proved 
through ‘reciprocal replacement’ – and of these one class are 
identical in genus, namely all those whose difference consists 
in their concerning different subjects or in their mode of 
manifestation. This latter class may be exemplified by the 
questions as to the causes respectively of echo, of reflection, 
and of the rainbow: the connexions to be proved which these 
questions embody are identical generically, because all three are 
forms of repercussion; but specifically they are different. 

Other connexions that require proof only differ in that the 
‘middle’ of the one is subordinate to the ‘middle’ of the other. 
For example: Why does the Nile rise towards the end of the 
month? Because towards its close the month is more stormy. 
Why is the month more stormy towards its close? Because the 
moon is waning. Here the one cause is subordinate to the other. 

The question might be raised with regard to cause and effect 
whether when the effect is present the cause also is present; 
whether, for instance, if a plant sheds its leaves or the moon is 
eclipsed, there is present also the cause of the eclipse or of the 
fall of the leaves – the possession of broad leaves, let us say, in 
the latter case, in the former the earth’s interposition. For, one 
might argue, if this cause is not present, these phenomena will 
have some other cause: if it is present, its effect will be at once 
implied by it – the eclipse by the earth’s interposition, the fall of 


the leaves by the possession of broad leaves; but if so, they will 
be logically coincident and each capable of proof through the 
other. Let me illustrate: Let A be deciduous character, B the 
possession of broad leaves, C vine. Now if A inheres in B (for 
every broad-leaved plant is deciduous), and B in C (every vine 
possessing broad leaves); then A inheres in C (every vine is 
deciduous), and the middle term B is the cause. But we can also 
demonstrate that the vine has broad leaves because it is 
deciduous. Thus, let D be broad-leaved, E deciduous, F vine. 
Then E inheres in F (since every vine is deciduous), and D in E 
(for every deciduous plant has broad leaves): therefore every 
vine has broad leaves, and the cause is its deciduous character. 
If, however, they cannot each be the cause of the other (for 
cause is prior to effect, and the earth’s interposition is the cause 
of the moon’s eclipse and not the eclipse of the interposition) – 
if, then, demonstration through the cause is of the reasoned 
fact and demonstration not through the cause is of the bare 
fact, one who knows it through the eclipse knows the fact of the 
earth’s interposition but not the reasoned fact. Moreover, that 
the eclipse is not the cause of the interposition, but the 
interposition of the eclipse, is obvious because the interposition 
is an element in the definition of eclipse, which shows that the 
eclipse is known through the interposition and not vice versa. 

On the other hand, can a single effect have more than one 
cause? One might argue as follows: if the same attribute is 
predicable of more than one thing as its primary subject, let B 
be a primary subject in which A inheres, and C another primary 
subject of A, and D and E primary subjects of B and C 
respectively. A will then inhere in D and E, and B will be the 
cause of A’s inherence in D, C of A’s inherence in E. The presence 
of the cause thus necessitates that of the effect, but the 
presence of the effect necessitates the presence not of all that 
may cause it but only of a cause which yet need not be the 
whole cause. We may, however, suggest that if the connexion to 


be proved is always universal and commensurate, not only will 
the cause be a whole but also the effect will be universal and 
commensurate. For instance, deciduous character will belong 
exclusively to a subject which is a whole, and, if this whole has 
species, universally and commensurately to those species – i.e. 
either to all species of plant or to a single species. So in these 
universal and commensurate connexions the ‘middle’ and its 
effect must reciprocate, i.e. be convertible. Supposing, for 
example, that the reason why trees are deciduous is the 
coagulation of sap, then if a tree is deciduous, coagulation must 
be present, and if coagulation is present – not in any subject but 
in a tree – then that tree must be deciduous. 

Can the cause of an identical effect be not identical in every 
instance of the effect but different? Or is that impossible? 
Perhaps it is impossible if the effect is demonstrated as 
essential and not as inhering in virtue of a symptom or an 
accident – because the middle is then the definition of the 
major term – though possible if the demonstration is not 
essential. Now it is possible to consider the effect and its subject 
as an accidental conjunction, though such conjunctions would 
not be regarded as connexions demanding scientific proof. But 
if they are accepted as such, the middle will correspond to the 
extremes, and be equivocal if they are equivocal, generically one 
if they are generically one. Take the question why proportionals 
alternate. The cause when they are lines, and when they are 
numbers, is both different and identical; different in so far as 
lines are lines and not numbers, identical as involving a given 
determinate increment. In all proportionals this is so. Again, the 
cause of likeness between colour and colour is other than that 


between figure and figure; for likeness here is equivocal, 
meaning perhaps in the latter case equality of the ratios of the 
sides and equality of the angles, in the case of colours identity 
of the act of perceiving them, or something else of the sort. 
Again, connexions requiring proof which are identical by 
analogy middles also analogous. 

The truth is that cause, effect, and subject are reciprocally 
predicable in the following way. If the species are taken 
severally, the effect is wider than the subject (e.g. the possession 
of external angles equal to four right angles is an attribute 
wider than triangle or are), but it is coextensive with the species 
taken collectively (in this instance with all figures whose 
external angles are equal to four right angles). And the middle 
likewise reciprocates, for the middle is a definition of the major; 
which is incidentally the reason why all the sciences are built 
up through definition. 

We may illustrate as follows. Deciduous is a universal attribute 
of vine, and is at the same time of wider extent than vine; and 
of fig, and is of wider extent than fig: but it is not wider than but 
coextensive with the totality of the species. Then if you take the 
middle which is proximate, it is a definition of deciduous. I say 
that, because you will first reach a middle next the subject, and 
a premiss asserting it of the whole subject, and after that a 
middle – the coagulation of sap or something of the sort – 
proving the connexion of the first middle with the major: but it 
is the coagulation of sap at the junction of leaf-stalk and stem 
which defines deciduous. 

If an explanation in formal terms of the inter-relation of cause 
and effect is demanded, we shall offer the following. Let A be an 
attribute of all B, and B of every species of D, but so that both A 
and B are wider than their respective subjects. Then B will be a 
universal attribute of each species of D (since I call such an 


attribute universal even if it is not commensurate, and I call an 
attribute primary universal if it is commensurate, not with each 
species severally but with their totality), and it extends beyond 
each of them taken separately. 

Thus, B is the cause of A’s inherence in the species of D: 
consequently A must be of wider extent than B; otherwise why 
should B be the cause of A’s inherence in D any more than A the 
cause of B’s inherence in D? Now if A is an attribute of all the 
species of E, all the species of E will be united by possessing 
some common cause other than B: otherwise how shall we be 
able to say that A is predicable of all of which E is predicable, 
while E is not predicable of all of which A can be predicated? I 
mean how can there fail to be some special cause of A’s 
inherence in E, as there was of A’s inherence in all the species of 
D? Then are the species of E, too, united by possessing some 
common cause? This cause we must look for. Let us call it C. 

We conclude, then, that the same effect may have more than 
one cause, but not in subjects specifically identical. For 
instance, the cause of longevity in quadrupeds is lack of bile, in 
birds a dry constitution – or certainly something different. 

If immediate premisses are not reached at once, and there is 
not merely one middle but several middles, i.e. several causes; is 
the cause of the property’s inherence in the several species the 
middle which is proximate to the primary universal, or the 
middle which is proximate to the species? Clearly the cause is 
that nearest to each species severally in which it is manifested, 
for that is the cause of the subject’s falling under the universal. 
To illustrate formally: C is the cause of B’s inherence in D; hence 


C is the cause of A’s inherence in D, B of A’s inherence in C, 
while the cause of A’s inherence in B is B itself. 

As regards syllogism and demonstration, the definition of, and 
the conditions required to produce each of them, are now clear, 
and with that also the definition of, and the conditions required 
to produce, demonstrative knowledge, since it is the same as 
demonstration. As to the basic premisses, how they become 
known and what is the developed state of knowledge of them is 
made clear by raising some preliminary problems. 

We have already said that scientific knowledge through 
demonstration is impossible unless a man knows the primary 
immediate premisses. But there are questions which might be 
raised in respect of the apprehension of these immediate 
premisses: one might not only ask whether it is of the same 
kind as the apprehension of the conclusions, but also whether 
there is or is not scientific knowledge of both; or scientific 
knowledge of the latter, and of the former a different kind of 
knowledge; and, further, whether the developed states of 
knowledge are not innate but come to be in us, or are innate but 
at first unnoticed. Now it is strange if we possess them from 
birth; for it means that we possess apprehensions more 
accurate than demonstration and fail to notice them. If on the 
other hand we acquire them and do not previously possess 
them, how could we apprehend and learn without a basis of 
pre-existent knowledge? For that is impossible, as we used to 
find in the case of demonstration. So it emerges that neither 
can we possess them from birth, nor can they come to be in us 
if we are without knowledge of them to the extent of having no 


such developed state at all. Therefore we must possess a 
capacity of some sort, but not such as to rank higher in accuracy 
than these developed states. And this at least is an obvious 
characteristic of all animals, for they possess a congenital 
discriminative capacity which is called sense-perception. But 
though sense-perception is innate in all animals, in some the 
sense-impression comes to persist, in others it does not. So 
animals in which this persistence does not come to be have 
either no knowledge at all outside the act of perceiving, or no 
knowledge of objects of which no impression persists; animals 
in which it does come into being have perception and can 
continue to retain the sense-impression in the soul: and when 
such persistence is frequently repeated a further distinction at 
once arises between those which out of the persistence of such 
sense-impressions develop a power of systematizing them and 
those which do not. So out of sense-perception comes to be 
what we call memory, and out of frequently repeated memories 
of the same thing develops experience; for a number of 
memories constitute a single experience. From experience again 

– i.e. from the universal now stabilized in its entirety within the 
soul, the one beside the many which is a single identity within 
them all – originate the skill of the craftsman and the 
knowledge of the man of science, skill in the sphere of coming 
to be and science in the sphere of being. 
We conclude that these states of knowledge are neither innate 
in a determinate form, nor developed from other higher states 
of knowledge, but from sense-perception. It is like a rout in 
battle stopped by first one man making a stand and then 
another, until the original formation has been restored. The soul 
is so constituted as to be capable of this process. 

Let us now restate the account given already, though with 
insufficient clearness. When one of a number of logically 
indiscriminable particulars has made a stand, the earliest 


universal is present in the soul: for though the act of sense-
perception is of the particular, its content is universal – is man, 
for example, not the man Callias. A fresh stand is made among 
these rudimentary universals, and the process does not cease 
until the indivisible concepts, the true universals, are 
established: e.g. such and such a species of animal is a step 
towards the genus animal, which by the same process is a step 
towards a further generalization. 

Thus it is clear that we must get to know the primary premisses 
by induction; for the method by which even sense-perception 
implants the universal is inductive. Now of the thinking states 
by which we grasp truth, some are unfailingly true, others admit 
of error – opinion, for instance, and calculation, whereas 
scientific knowing and intuition are always true: further, no 
other kind of thought except intuition is more accurate than 
scientific knowledge, whereas primary premisses are more 
knowable than demonstrations, and all scientific knowledge is 
discursive. From these considerations it follows that there will 
be no scientific knowledge of the primary premisses, and since 
except intuition nothing can be truer than scientific knowledge, 
it will be intuition that apprehends the primary premisses – a 
result which also follows from the fact that demonstration 
cannot be the originative source of demonstration, nor, 
consequently, scientific knowledge of scientific knowledge.If, 
therefore, it is the only other kind of true thinking except 
scientific knowing, intuition will be the originative source of 
scientific knowledge. And the originative source of science 
grasps the original basic premiss, while science as a whole is 
similarly related as originative source to the whole body of fact. 


Aristotle – Topics 
[Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge] 


Book I 

Our treatise proposes to find a line of inquiry whereby we shall 
be able to reason from opinions that are generally accepted 
about every problem propounded to us, and also shall ourselves, 
when standing up to an argument, avoid saying anything that 
will obstruct us. First, then, we must say what reasoning is, and 
what its varieties are, in order to grasp dialectical reasoning: for 
this is the object of our search in the treatise before us. 

Now reasoning is an argument in which, certain things being 
laid down, something other than these necessarily comes about 
through them. (a) It is a ‘demonstration’, when the premisses 
from which the reasoning starts are true and primary, or are 
such that our knowledge of them has originally come through 
premisses which are primary and true: (b) reasoning, on the 
other hand, is ‘dialectical’, if it reasons from opinions that are 
generally accepted. Things are ‘true’ and ‘primary’ which are 
believed on the strength not of anything else but of themselves: 
for in regard to the first principles of science it is improper to 
ask any further for the why and wherefore of them; each of the 
first principles should command belief in and by itself. On the 
other hand, those opinions are ‘generally accepted’ which are 
accepted by every one or by the majority or by the philosophers 

– i.e. by all, or by the majority, or by the most notable and 

illustrious of them. Again (c), reasoning is ‘contentious’ if it 
starts from opinions that seem to be generally accepted, but are 
not really such, or again if it merely seems to reason from 
opinions that are or seem to be generally accepted. For not 
every opinion that seems to be generally accepted actually is 
generally accepted. For in none of the opinions which we call 
generally accepted is the illusion entirely on the surface, as 
happens in the case of the principles of contentious arguments; 
for the nature of the fallacy in these is obvious immediately, 
and as a rule even to persons with little power of 
comprehension. So then, of the contentious reasonings 
mentioned, the former really deserves to be called ‘reasoning’ 
as well, but the other should be called ‘contentious reasoning’, 
but not ‘reasoning’, since it appears to reason, but does not 
really do so. Further (d), besides all the reasonings we have 
mentioned there are the mis-reasonings that start from the 
premisses peculiar to the special sciences, as happens (for 
example) in the case of geometry and her sister sciences. For 
this form of reasoning appears to differ from the reasonings 
mentioned above; the man who draws a false figure reasons 
from things that are neither true and primary, nor yet generally 
accepted. For he does not fall within the definition; he does not 
assume opinions that are received either by every one or by the 
majority or by philosophers – that is to say, by all, or by most, or 
by the most illustrious of them – but he conducts his reasoning 
upon assumptions which, though appropriate to the science in 
question, are not true; for he effects his mis-reasoning either by 
describing the semicircles wrongly or by drawing certain lines in 
a way in which they could not be drawn. 

The foregoing must stand for an outline survey of the species of 
reasoning. In general, in regard both to all that we have already 
discussed and to those which we shall discuss later, we may 
remark that that amount of distinction between them may 
serve, because it is not our purpose to give the exact definition 


of any of them; we merely want to describe them in outline; we 
consider it quite enough from the point of view of the line of 
inquiry before us to be able to recognize each of them in some 
sort of way. 

Next in order after the foregoing, we must say for how many 
and for what purposes the treatise is useful. They are three – 
intellectual training, casual encounters, and the philosophical 
sciences. That it is useful as a training is obvious on the face of 
it. The possession of a plan of inquiry will enable us more easily 
to argue about the subject proposed. For purposes of casual 
encounters, it is useful because when we have counted up the 
opinions held by most people, we shall meet them on the 
ground not of other people’s convictions but of their own, while 
we shift the ground of any argument that they appear to us to 
state unsoundly. For the study of the philosophical sciences it is 
useful, because the ability to raise searching difficulties on both 
sides of a subject will make us detect more easily the truth and 
error about the several points that arise. It has a further use in 
relation to the ultimate bases of the principles used in the 
several sciences. For it is impossible to discuss them at all from 
the principles proper to the particular science in hand, seeing 
that the principles are the prius of everything else: it is through 
the opinions generally held on the particular points that these 
have to be discussed, and this task belongs properly, or most 
appropriately, to dialectic: for dialectic is a process of criticism 
wherein lies the path to the principles of all inquiries. 


We shall be in perfect possession of the way to proceed when 
we are in a position like that which we occupy in regard to 
rhetoric and medicine and faculties of that kind: this means the 
doing of that which we choose with the materials that are 
available. For it is not every method that the rhetorician will 
employ to persuade, or the doctor to heal; still, if he omits none 
of the available means, we shall say that his grasp of the science 
is adequate. 

First, then, we must see of what parts our inquiry consists. Now 
if we were to grasp (a) with reference to how many, and what 
kind of, things arguments take place, and with what materials 
they start, and (b) how we are to become well supplied with 
these, we should have sufficiently won our goal. Now the 
materials with which arguments start are equal in number, and 
are identical, with the subjects on which reasonings take place. 
For arguments start with ‘propositions’, while the subjects on 
which reasonings take place are ‘problems’. Now every 
proposition and every problem indicates either a genus or a 
peculiarity or an accident – for the differentia too, applying as it 
does to a class (or genus), should be ranked together with the 
genus. Since, however, of what is peculiar to anything part 
signifies its essence, while part does not, let us divide the 
‘peculiar’ into both the aforesaid parts, and call that part which 
indicates the essence a ‘definition’, while of the remainder let 
us adopt the terminology which is generally current about these 
things, and speak of it as a ‘property’. What we have said, then, 
makes it clear that according to our present division, the 


elements turn out to be four, all told, namely either property or 
definition or genus or accident. Do not let any one suppose us 
to mean that each of these enunciated by itself constitutes a 
proposition or problem, but only that it is from these that both 
problems and propositions are formed. The difference between 
a problem and a proposition is a difference in the turn of the 
phrase. For if it be put in this way, «‘An animal that walks on 
two feet» is the definition of man, is it not?’ or ‘«Animal» is the 
genus of man, is it not?’ the result is a proposition: but if thus, 
‘Is «an animal that walks on two feet» a definition of man or 
no?’ [or ‘Is «animal» his genus or no?’] the result is a problem. 
Similarly too in other cases. Naturally, then, problems and 
propositions are equal in number: for out of every proposition 
you will make a problem if you change the turn of the phrase. 

We must now say what are ‘definition’, ‘property’, ‘genus’, and 
‘accident’. A ‘definition’ is a phrase signifying a thing’s essence. 
It is rendered in the form either of a phrase in lieu of a term, or 
of a phrase in lieu of another phrase; for it is sometimes 
possible to define the meaning of a phrase as well. People 
whose rendering consists of a term only, try it as they may, 
clearly do not render the definition of the thing in question, 
because a definition is always a phrase of a certain kind. One 
may, however, use the word ‘definitory’ also of such a remark as 
‘The «becoming» is «beautiful»‘, and likewise also of the 
question, ‘Are sensation and knowledge the same or different?’, 
for argument about definitions is mostly concerned with 
questions of sameness and difference. In a word we may call 
‘definitory’ everything that falls under the same branch of 
inquiry as definitions; and that all the above-mentioned 


examples are of this character is clear on the face of them. For if 
we are able to argue that two things are the same or are 
different, we shall be well supplied by the same turn of 
argument with lines of attack upon their definitions as well: for 
when we have shown that they are not the same we shall have 
demolished the definition. Observe, please, that the converse of 
this last statement does not hold: for to show that they are the 
same is not enough to establish a definition. To show, however, 
that they are not the same is enough of itself to overthrow it. 

A ‘property’ is a predicate which does not indicate the essence 
of a thing, but yet belongs to that thing alone, and is predicated 
convertibly of it. Thus it is a property of man to-be-capable of 
learning grammar: for if A be a man, then he is capable of 
learning grammar, and if he be capable of learning grammar, he 
is a man. For no one calls anything a ‘property’ which may 
possibly belong to something else, e.g. ‘sleep’ in the case of 
man, even though at a certain time it may happen to belong to 
him alone. That is to say, if any such thing were actually to be 
called a property, it will be called not a ‘property’ absolutely, but 
a ‘temporary’ or a ‘relative’ property: for ‘being on the right 
hand side’ is a temporary property, while ‘two-footed’ is in point 
of fact ascribed as a property in certain relations; e.g. it is a 
property of man relatively to a horse and a dog. That nothing 
which may belong to anything else than A is a convertible 
predicate of A is clear: for it does not necessarily follow that if 
something is asleep it is a man. 

A ‘genus’ is what is predicated in the category of essence of a 
number of things exhibiting differences in kind. We should treat 
as predicates in the category of essence all such things as it 
would be appropriate to mention in reply to the question, ‘What 
is the object before you?’; as, for example, in the case of man, if 
asked that question, it is appropriate to say ‘He is an animal’. 
The question, ‘Is one thing in the same genus as another or in a 


different one?’ is also a ‘generic’ question; for a question of that 
kind as well falls under the same branch of inquiry as the 
genus: for having argued that ‘animal’ is the genus of man, and 
likewise also of ox, we shall have argued that they are in the 
same genus; whereas if we show that it is the genus of the one 
but not of the other, we shall have argued that these things are 
not in the same genus. 

An ‘accident’ is (i) something which, though it is none of the 
foregoing – i.e. neither a definition nor a property nor a genus 
yet belongs to the thing: (something which may possibly either 
belong or not belong to any one and the self-same thing, as 
(e.g.) the ‘sitting posture’ may belong or not belong to some selfsame 
thing. Likewise also ‘whiteness’, for there is nothing to 
prevent the same thing being at one time white, and at another 
not white. Of the definitions of accident the second is the 
better: for if he adopts the first, any one is bound, if he is to 
understand it, to know already what ‘definition’ and ‘genus’ and 
‘property’ are, whereas the second is sufficient of itself to tell us 
the essential meaning of the term in question. To Accident are 
to be attached also all comparisons of things together, when 
expressed in language that is drawn in any kind of way from 
what happens (accidit) to be true of them; such as, for example, 
the question, ‘Is the honourable or the expedient preferable?’ 
and ‘Is the life of virtue or the life of self-indulgence the 
pleasanter?’, and any other problem which may happen to be 
phrased in terms like these. For in all such cases the question is 
‘to which of the two does the predicate in question happen 
(accidit) to belong more closely?’ It is clear on the face of it that 
there is nothing to prevent an accident from becoming a 
temporary or relative property. Thus the sitting posture is an 
accident, but will be a temporary property, whenever a man is 
the only person sitting, while if he be not the only one sitting, it 
is still a property relatively to those who are not sitting. So then, 
there is nothing to prevent an accident from becoming both a 


relative and a temporary property; but a property absolutely it 
will never be. 

We must not fail to observe that all remarks made in criticism 
of a ‘property’ and ‘genus’ and ‘accident’ will be applicable to 
‘definitions’ as well. For when we have shown that the attribute 
in question fails to belong only to the term defined, as we do 
also in the case of a property, or that the genus rendered in the 
definition is not the true genus, or that any of the things 
mentioned in the phrase used does not belong, as would be 
remarked also in the case of an accident, we shall have 
demolished the definition; so that, to use the phrase previously 
employed,’ all the points we have enumerated might in a 
certain sense be called ‘definitory’. But we must not on this 
account expect to find a single line of inquiry which will apply 
universally to them all: for this is not an easy thing to find, and, 
even were one found, it would be very obscure indeed, and of 
little service for the treatise before us. Rather, a special plan of 
inquiry must be laid down for each of the classes we have 
distinguished, and then, starting from the rules that are 
appropriate in each case, it will probably be easier to make our 
way right through the task before us. So then, as was said 
before,’ we must outline a division of our subject, and other 
questions we must relegate each to the particular branch to 
which it most naturally belongs, speaking of them as ‘definitory’ 
and ‘generic’ questions. The questions I mean have practically 
been already assigned to their several branches. 


First of all we must define the number of senses borne by the 
term ‘Sameness’. Sameness would be generally regarded as 
falling, roughly speaking, into three divisions. We generally 
apply the term numerically or specifically or generically – 
numerically in cases where there is more than one name but 
only one thing, e.g. ‘doublet’ and ‘cloak’; specifically, where 
there is more than one thing, but they present no differences in 
respect of their species, as one man and another, or one horse 
and another: for things like this that fall under the same species 
are said to be ‘specifically the same’. Similarly, too, those things 
are called generically the same which fall under the same 
genus, such as a horse and a man. It might appear that the 
sense in which water from the same spring is called ‘the same 
water’ is somehow different and unlike the senses mentioned 
above: but really such a case as this ought to be ranked in the 
same class with the things that in one way or another are called 
‘the same’ in view of unity of species. For all such things seem 
to be of one family and to resemble one another. For the reaon 
why all water is said to be specifically the same as all other 
water is because of a certain likeness it bears to it, and the only 
difference in the case of water drawn from the same spring is 
this, that the likeness is more emphatic: that is why we do not 
distinguish it from the things that in one way or another are 
called ‘the same’ in view of unity of species. It is generally 
supposed that the term ‘the same’ is most used in a sense 
agreed on by every one when applied to what is numerically 
one. But even so, it is apt to be rendered in more than one 
sense; its most literal and primary use is found whenever the 
sameness is rendered in reference to an alternative name or 
definition, as when a cloak is said to be the same as a doublet, 
or an animal that walks on two feet is said to be the same as a 
man: a second sense is when it is rendered in reference to a 
property, as when what can acquire knowledge is called the 


same as a man, and what naturally travels upward the same as 
fire: while a third use is found when it is rendered in reference 
to some term drawn from Accident, as when the creature who is 
sitting, or who is musical, is called the same as Socrates. For all 
these uses mean to signify numerical unity. That what I have 
just said is true may be best seen where one form of appellation 
is substituted for another. For often when we give the order to 
call one of the people who are sitting down, indicating him by 
name, we change our description, whenever the person to 
whom we give the order happens not to understand us; he will, 
we think, understand better from some accidental feature; so 
we bid him call to us ‘the man who is sitting’ or ‘who is 
conversing over there’ – clearly supposing ourselves to be 
indicating the same object by its name and by its accident. 

Of ‘sameness’ then, as has been said,’ three senses are to be 
distinguished. Now one way to confirm that the elements 
mentioned above are those out of which and through which and 
to which arguments proceed, is by induction: for if any one were 
to survey propositions and problems one by one, it would be 
seen that each was formed either from the definition of 
something or from its property or from its genus or from its 
accident. Another way to confirm it is through reasoning. For 
every predicate of a subject must of necessity be either 
convertible with its subject or not: and if it is convertible, it 
would be its definition or property, for if it signifies the essence, 
it is the definition; if not, it is a property: for this was what a 
property is, viz. what is predicated convertibly, but does not 
signify the essence. If, on the other hand, it is not predicated 
convertibly of the thing, it either is or is not one of the terms 


contained in the definition of the subject: and if it be one of 
those terms, then it will be the genus or the differentia, 
inasmuch as the definition consists of genus and differentiae; 
whereas, if it be not one of those terms, clearly it would be an 
accident, for accident was said’ to be what belongs as an 
attribute to a subject without being either its definition or its 
genus or a property. 

Next, then, we must distinguish between the classes of 
predicates in which the four orders in question are found. These 
are ten in number: Essence, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Place, 
Time, Position, State, Activity, Passivity. For the accident and 
genus and property and definition of anything will always be in 
one of these categories: for all the propositions found through 
these signify either something’s essence or its quality or 
quantity or some one of the other types of predicate. It is clear, 
too, on the face of it that the man who signifies something’s 
essence signifies sometimes a substance, sometimes a quality, 
sometimes some one of the other types of predicate. For when 
man is set before him and he says that what is set there is ‘a 
man’ or ‘an animal’, he states its essence and signifies a 
substance; but when a white colour is set before him and he 
says that what is set there is ‘white’ or is ‘a colour’, he states its 
essence and signifies a quality. Likewise, also, if a magnitude of 
a cubit be set before him and he says that what is set there is a 
magnitude of a cubit, he will be describing its essence and 
signifying a quantity. Likewise, also, in the other cases: for each 
of these kinds of predicate, if either it be asserted of itself, or its 
genus be asserted of it, signifies an essence: if, on the other 
hand, one kind of predicate is asserted of another kind, it does 


not signify an essence, but a quantity or a quality or one of the 
other kinds of predicate. Such, then, and so many, are the 
subjects on which arguments take place, and the materials with 
which they start. How we are to acquire them, and by what 
means we are to become well supplied with them, falls next to 
be told. 

First, then, a definition must be given of a ‘dialectical 
proposition’ and a ‘dialectical problem’. For it is not every 
proposition nor yet every problem that is to be set down as 
dialectical: for no one in his senses would make a proposition of 
what no one holds, nor yet make a problem of what is obvious 
to everybody or to most people: for the latter admits of no 
doubt, while to the former no one would assent. Now a 
dialectical proposition consists in asking something that is held 
by all men or by most men or by the philosophers, i.e. either by 
all, or by most, or by the most notable of these, provided it be 
not contrary to the general opinion; for a man would probably 
assent to the view of the philosophers, if it be not contrary to 
the opinions of most men. Dialectical propositions also include 
views which are like those generally accepted; also propositions 
which contradict the contraries of opinions that are taken to be 
generally accepted, and also all opinions that are in accordance 
with the recognized arts. Thus, supposing it to be a general 
opinion that the knowledge of contraries is the same, it might 
probably pass for a general opinion also that the perception of 
contraries is the same: also, supposing it to be a general opinion 
that there is but one single science of grammar, it might pass 
for a general opinion that there is but one science of flute-
playing as well, whereas, if it be a general opinion that there is 


more than one science of grammar, it might pass for a general 
opinion that there is more than one science of flute-playing as 
well: for all these seem to be alike and akin. Likewise, also, 
propositions contradicting the contraries of general opinions 
will pass as general opinions: for if it be a general opinion that 
one ought to do good to one’s friends, it will also be a general 
opinion that one ought not to do them harm. Here, that one 
ought to do harm to one’s friends is contrary to the general 
view, and that one ought not to do them harm is the 
contradictory of that contrary. Likewise also, if one ought to do 
good to one’s friends, one ought not to do good to one’s 
enemies: this too is the contradictory of the view contrary to the 
general view; the contrary being that one ought to do good to 
one’s enemies. Likewise, also, in other cases. Also, on 
comparison, it will look like a general opinion that the contrary 
predicate belongs to the contrary subject: e.g. if one ought to do 
good to one’s friends, one ought also to do evil to one’s enemies. 
it might appear also as if doing good to one’s friends were a 
contrary to doing evil to one’s enemies: but whether this is or is 
not so in reality as well will be stated in the course of the 
discussion upon contraries. Clearly also, all opinions that are in 
accordance with the arts are dialectical propositions; for people 
are likely to assent to the views held by those who have made a 
study of these things, e.g. on a question of medicine they will 
agree with the doctor, and on a question of geometry with the 
geometrician; and likewise also in other cases. 

A dialectical problem is a subject of inquiry that contributes 
either to choice and avoidance, or to truth and knowledge, and 
that either by itself, or as a help to the solution of some other 



such problem. It must, moreover, be something on which either 
people hold no opinion either way, or the masses hold a 
contrary opinion to the philosophers, or the philosophers to the 
masses, or each of them among themselves. For some problems 
it is useful to know with a view to choice or avoidance, e.g. 
whether pleasure is to be chosen or not, while some it is useful 
to know merely with a view to knowledge, e.g. whether the 
universe is eternal or not: others, again, are not useful in and by 
themselves for either of these purposes, but yet help us in 
regard to some such problems; for there are many things which 
we do not wish to know in and by themselves, but for the sake 
of other things, in order that through them we may come to 
know something else. Problems also include questions in regard 
to which reasonings conflict (the difficulty then being whether 
so – and so is so or not, there being convincing arguments for 
both views); others also in regard to which we have no 
argument because they are so vast, and we find it difficult to 
give our reasons, e.g. the question whether the universe is 
eternal or no: for into questions of that kind too it is possible to 
inquire. 

Problems, then, and propositions are to be defined as aforesaid. 
A ‘thesis’ is a supposition of some eminent philosopher that 
conflicts with the general opinion; e.g. the view that 
contradiction is impossible, as Antisthenes said; or the view of 
Heraclitus that all things are in motion; or that Being is one, as 
Melissus says: for to take notice when any ordinary person 
expresses views contrary to men’s usual opinions would be silly. 
Or it may be a view about which we have a reasoned theory 
contrary to men’s usual opinions, e.g. the view maintained by 
the sophists that what is need not in every case either have 
come to be or be eternal: for a musician who is a grammarian 
‘is’ so without ever having ‘come to be’ so, or being so eternally. 
For even if a man does not accept this view, he might do so on 
the ground that it is reasonable. 


Now a ‘thesis’ also is a problem, though a problem is not always 
a thesis, inasmuch as some problems are such that we have no 
opinion about them either way. That a thesis, however, also 
forms a problem, is clear: for it follows of necessity from what 
has been said that either the mass of men disagree with the 
philosophers about the thesis, or that the one or the other class 
disagree among themselves, seeing that the thesis is a 
supposition in conflict with general opinion. Practically all 
dialectical problems indeed are now called ‘theses’. But it 
should make no difference whichever description is used; for 
our object in thus distinguishing them has not been to create a 
terminology, but to recognize what differences happen to be 
found between them. 

Not every problem, nor every thesis, should be examined, but 
only one which might puzzle one of those who need argument, 
not punishment or perception. For people who are puzzled to 
know whether one ought to honour the gods and love one’s 
parents or not need punishment, while those who are puzzled 
to know whether snow is white or not need perception. The 
subjects should not border too closely upon the sphere of 
demonstration, nor yet be too far removed from it: for the 
former cases admit of no doubt, while the latter involve 
difficulties too great for the art of the trainer. 

Having drawn these definitions, we must distinguish how many 
species there are of dialectical arguments. There is on the one 
hand Induction, on the other Reasoning. Now what reasoning is 
has been said before: induction is a passage from individuals to 
universals, e.g. the argument that supposing the skilled pilot is 


the most effective, and likewise the skilled charioteer, then in 
general the skilled man is the best at his particular task. 
Induction is the more convincing and clear: it is more readily 
learnt by the use of the senses, and is applicable generally to 
the mass of men, though reasoning is more forcible and 
effective against contradictious people. 

The classes, then, of things about which, and of things out of 
which, arguments are constructed, are to be distinguished in 
the way we have said before. The means whereby we are to 
become well supplied with reasonings are four: (1) the securing 
of propositions; (2) the power to distinguish in how many 
senses particular expression is used; (3) the discovery of the 
differences of things; (4) the investigation of likeness. The last 
three, as well, are in a certain sense propositions: for it is 
possible to make a proposition corresponding to each of them, 

e.g. (1) ‘The desirable may mean either the honourable or the 
pleasant or the expedient’; and (2) Sensation differs from 
knowledge in that the latter may be recovered again after it has 
been lost, while the former cannot’; and (3) The relation of the 
healthy to health is like that of the vigorous to vigour’. The first 
proposition depends upon the use of one term in several senses, 
the second upon the differences of things, the third upon their 
likenesses. 

Propositions should be selected in a number of ways 
corresponding to the number of distinctions drawn in regard to 
the proposition: thus one may first take in hand the opinions 
held by all or by most men or by the philosophers, i.e. by all, or 
most, or the most notable of them; or opinions contrary to those 
that seem to be generally held; and, again, all opinions that are 
in accordance with the arts. We must make propositions also of 
the contradictories of opinions contrary to those that seem to 
be generally held, as was laid down before. It is useful also to 
make them by selecting not only those opinions that actually 
are accepted, but also those that are like these, e.g. ‘The 
perception of contraries is the same’ – the knowledge of them 
being so – and ‘we see by admission of something into 
ourselves, not by an emission’; for so it is, too, in the case of the 
other senses; for in hearing we admit something into ourselves; 
we do not emit; and we taste in the same way. Likewise also in 
the other cases. Moreover, all statements that seem to be true in 
all or in most cases, should be taken as a principle or accepted 
position; for they are posited by those who do not also see what 
exception there may be. We should select also from the written 
handbooks of argument, and should draw up sketch-lists of 
them upon each several kind of subject, putting them down 
under separate headings, e.g. ‘On Good’, or ‘On Life’ – and that 
‘On Good’ should deal with every form of good, beginning with 
the category of essence. In the margin, too, one should indicate 
also the opinions of individual thinkers, e.g. ‘Empedocles said 
that the elements of bodies were four’: for any one might assent 
to the saying of some generally accepted authority. 

Of propositions and problems there are – to comprehend the 
matter in outline – three divisions: for some are ethical 
propositions, some are on natural philosophy, while some are 
logical. Propositions such as the following are ethical, e.g. 


‘Ought one rather to obey one’s parents or the laws, if they 
disagree?’; such as this are logical, e.g. ‘Is the knowledge of 
opposites the same or not?’; while such as this are on natural 
philosophy, e.g. ‘Is the universe eternal or not?’ Likewise also 
with problems. The nature of each of the aforesaid kinds of 
proposition is not easily rendered in a definition, but we have to 
try to recognize each of them by means of the familiarity 
attained through induction, examining them in the light of the 
illustrations given above. 

For purposes of philosophy we must treat of these things 
according to their truth, but for dialectic only with an eye to 
general opinion. All propositions should be taken in their most 
universal form; then, the one should be made into many. E.g. 
‘The knowledge of opposites is the same’; next, ‘The knowledge 
of contraries is the same’, and that ‘of relative terms’. In the 
same way these two should again be divided, as long as division 
is possible, e.g. the knowledge of ‘good and evil’, of ‘white and 
black’, or ‘cold and hot’. Likewise also in other cases. 

On the formation, then, of propositions, the above remarks are 
enough. As regards the number of senses a term bears, we must 
not only treat of those terms which bear different senses, but 
we must also try to render their definitions; e.g. we must not 
merely say that justice and courage are called ‘good’ in one 
sense, and that what conduces to vigour and what conduces to 
health are called so in another, but also that the former are so 
called because of a certain intrinsic quality they themselves 
have, the latter because they are productive of a certain result 


and not because of any intrinsic quality in themselves. Similarly 
also in other cases. 

Whether a term bears a number of specific meanings or one 
only, may be considered by the following means. First, look and 
see if its contrary bears a number of meanings, whether the 
discrepancy between them be one of kind or one of names. For 
in some cases a difference is at once displayed even in the 
names; e.g. the contrary of ‘sharp’ in the case of a note is ‘flat’, 
while in the case of a solid edge it is ‘dull’. Clearly, then, the 
contrary of ‘sharp’ bears several meanings, and if so, also does 
‘sharp’; for corresponding to each of the former terms the 
meaning of its contrary will be different. For ‘sharp’ will not be 
the same when contrary to ‘dull’ and to ‘flat’, though ‘sharp’ is 
the contrary of each. Again Barhu (‘flat’, ‘heavy’) in the case of a 
note has ‘sharp’ as its contrary, but in the case of a solid mass 
‘light’, so that Barhu is used with a number of meanings, 
inasmuch as its contrary also is so used. Likewise, also, ‘fine’ as 
applied to a picture has ‘ugly’ as its contrary, but, as applied to a 
house, ‘ramshackle’; so that ‘fine’ is an ambiguous term. 

In some cases there is no discrepancy of any sort in the names 
used, but a difference of kind between the meanings is at once 
obvious: e.g. in the case of ‘clear’ and ‘obscure’: for sound is 
called ‘clear’ and ‘obscure’, just as ‘colour’ is too. As regards the 
names, then, there is no discrepancy, but the difference in kind 
between the meanings is at once obvious: for colour is not 
called ‘clear’ in a like sense to sound. This is plain also through 
sensation: for of things that are the same in kind we have the 
same sensation, whereas we do not judge clearness by the same 
sensation in the case of sound and of colour, but in the latter 
case we judge by sight, in the former by hearing. Likewise also 
with ‘sharp’ and ‘dull’ in regard to flavours and solid edges: here 
in the latter case we judge by touch, but in the former by taste. 
For here again there is no discrepancy in the names used, in the 


case either of the original terms or of their contraries: for the 
contrary also of sharp in either sense is ‘dull’. 

Moreover, see if one sense of a term has a contrary, while 
another has absolutely none; e.g. the pleasure of drinking has a 
contrary in the pain of thirst, whereas the pleasure of seeing 
that the diagonal is incommensurate with the side has none, so 
that ‘pleasure’ is used in more than one sense. To ‘love’ also, 
used of the frame of mind, has to ‘hate’ as its contrary, while as 
used of the physical activity (kissing) it has none: clearly, 
therefore, to ‘love’ is an ambiguous term. Further, see in regard 
to their intermediates, if some meanings and their contraries 
have an intermediate, others have none, or if both have one but 
not the same one, e.g. ‘clear’ and ‘obscure’ in the case of colours 
have ‘grey’ as an intermediate, whereas in the case of sound 
they have none, or, if they have, it is ‘harsh’, as some people say 
that a harsh sound is intermediate. ‘Clear’, then, is an 
ambiguous term, and likewise also ‘obscure’. See, moreover, if 
some of them have more than one intermediate, while others 
have but one, as is the case with ‘clear’ and ‘obscure’, for in the 
case of colours there are numbers of intermediates, whereas in 
regard to sound there is but one, viz. ‘harsh’. 

Again, in the case of the contradictory opposite, look and see if 
it bears more than one meaning. For if this bears more than one 
meaning, then the opposite of it also will be used in more than 
one meaning; e.g. ‘to fail to see’ a phrase with more than one 
meaning, viz. (1) to fail to possess the power of sight, (2) to fail 
to put that power to active use. But if this has more than one 
meaning, it follows necessarily that ‘to see’ also has more than 
one meaning: for there will be an opposite to each sense of ‘to 
fail to see’; e.g. the opposite of ‘not to possess the power of 
sight’ is to possess it, while of ‘not to put the power of sight to 
active use’, the opposite is to put it to active use. 


Moreover, examine the case of terms that denote the privation 
or presence of a certain state: for if the one term bears more 
than one meaning, then so will the remaining term: e.g. if ‘to 
have sense’ be used with more than one meaning, as applied to 
the soul and to the body, then ‘to be wanting in sense’ too will 
be used with more than one meaning, as applied to the soul and 
to the body. That the opposition between the terms now in 
question depends upon the privation or presence of a certain 
state is clear, since animals naturally possess each kind of 
‘sense’, both as applied to the soul and as applied to the body. 

Moreover, examine the inflected forms. For if ‘justly’ has more 
than one meaning, then ‘just’, also, will be used with more than 
one meaning; for there will be a meaning of ‘just’ to each of the 
meanings of ‘justly’; e.g. if the word ‘justly’ be used of judging 
according to one’s own opinion, and also of judging as one 
ought, then ‘just’ also will be used in like manner. In the same 
way also, if ‘healthy’ has more than one meaning, then 
‘healthily’ also will be used with more than one meaning: e.g. if 
‘healthy’ describes both what produces health and what 
preserves health and what betokens health, then ‘healthily’ also 
will be used to mean ‘in such a way as to produce’ or ‘preserve’ 
or ‘betoken’ health. Likewise also in other cases, whenever the 
original term bears more than one meaning, the inflexion also 
that is formed from it will be used with more than one 
meaning, and vice versa. 

Look also at the classes of the predicates signified by the term, 
and see if they are the same in all cases. For if they are not the 
same, then clearly the term is ambiguous: e.g. ‘good’ in the case 
of food means ‘productive of pleasure’, and in the case of 
medicine ‘productive of health’, whereas as applied to the soul 
it means to be of a certain quality, e.g. temperate or courageous 
or just: and likewise also, as applied to ‘man’. Sometimes it 
signifies what happens at a certain time, as (e.g.) the good that 


happens at the right time: for what happens at the right time is 
called good. Often it signifies what is of certain quantity, e.g. as 
applied to the proper amount: for the proper amount too is 
called good. So then the term ‘good’ is ambiguous. In the same 
way also ‘clear’, as applied to a body, signifies a colour, but in 
regard to a note it denotes what is ‘easy to hear’. ‘Sharp’, too, is 
in a closely similar case: for the same term does not bear the 
same meaning in all its applications: for a sharp note is a swift 
note, as the mathematical theorists of harmony tell us, whereas 
a sharp (acute) angle is one that is less than a right angle, while 
a sharp dagger is one containing a sharp angle (point). 

Look also at the genera of the objects denoted by the same 
term, and see if they are different without being subaltern, as 
(e.g.) ‘donkey’, which denotes both the animal and the engine. 
For the definition of them that corresponds to the name is 
different: for the one will be declared to be an animal of a 
certain kind, and the other to be an engine of a certain kind. If, 
however, the genera be subaltern, there is no necessity for the 
definitions to be different. Thus (e.g.) ‘animal’ is the genus of 
‘raven’, and so is ‘bird’. Whenever therefore we say that the 
raven is a bird, we also say that it is a certain kind of animal, so 
that both the genera are predicated of it. Likewise also 
whenever we call the raven a ‘flying biped animal’, we declare it 
to be a bird: in this way, then, as well, both the genera are 
predicated of raven, and also their definition. But in the case of 
genera that are not subaltern this does not happen, for 
whenever we call a thing an ‘engine’, we do not call it an 
animal, nor vice versa. 

Look also and see not only if the genera of the term before you 
are different without being subaltern, but also in the case of its 
contrary: for if its contrary bears several senses, clearly the term 
before you does so as well. 


It is useful also to look at the definition that arises from the use 
of the term in combination, e.g. of a ‘clear (lit. white) body’ of a 
‘clear note’. For then if what is peculiar in each case be 
abstracted, the same expression ought to remain over. This does 
not happen in the case of ambiguous terms, e.g. in the cases 
just mentioned. For the former will be body possessing such 
and such a colour’, while the latter will be ‘a note easy to hear’. 
Abstract, then, ‘a body ‘and’ a note’, and the remainder in each 
case is not the same. It should, however, have been had the 
meaning of ‘clear’ in each case been synonymous. 

Often in the actual definitions as well ambiguity creeps in 
unawares, and for this reason the definitions also should be 
examined. If (e.g.) any one describes what betokens and what 
produces health as ‘related commensurably to health’, we must 
not desist but go on to examine in what sense he has used the 
term ‘commensurably’ in each case, e.g. if in the latter case it 
means that ‘it is of the right amount to produce health’, 
whereas in the for it means that ‘it is such as to betoken what 
kind of state prevails’. 

Moreover, see if the terms cannot be compared as ‘more or less’ 
or as ‘in like manner’, as is the case (e.g.) with a ‘clear’ (lit. 
white) sound and a ‘clear’ garment, and a ‘sharp’ flavour and a 
‘sharp’ note. For neither are these things said to be clear or 
sharp ‘in a like degree’, nor yet is the one said to be clearer or 
sharper than the other. ‘Clear’, then, and ‘sharp’ are ambiguous. 
For synonyms are always comparable; for they will always be 
used either in like manner, or else in a greater degree in one 
case. 

Now since of genera that are different without being subaltern 
the differentiae also are different in kind, e.g. those of ‘animal’ 
and ‘knowledge’ (for the differentiae of these are different), look 
and see if the meanings comprised under the same term are 


differentiae of genera that are different without being subaltern, 
as e.g. ‘sharp’ is of a ‘note’ and a ‘solid’. For being ‘sharp’ 
differentiates note from note, and likewise also one solid from 
another. ‘Sharp’, then, is an ambiguous term: for it forms 
differentiae of genera that are different without being subaltern. 

Again, see if the actual meanings included under the same term 
themselves have different differentiae, e.g. ‘colour’ in bodies 
and ‘colour’ in tunes: for the differentiae of ‘colour’ in bodies are 
‘sight-piercing’ and ‘sight compressing’, whereas ‘colour’ in 
melodies has not the same differentiae. Colour, then, is an 
ambiguous term; for things that are the same have the same 
differentiae. 

Moreover, since the species is never the differentia of anything, 
look and see if one of the meanings included under the same 
term be a species and another a differentia, as (e.g.) clear’ (lit. 
white) as applied to a body is a species of colour, whereas in the 
case of a note it is a differentia; for one note is differentiated 
from another by being ‘clear’. 

The presence, then, of a number of meanings in a term may be 
investigated by these and like means. The differences which 
things present to each other should be examined within the 
same genera, e.g. ‘Wherein does justice differ from courage, and 
wisdom from temperance?’ – for all these belong to the same 
genus; and also from one genus to another, provided they be not 
very much too far apart, e.g. ‘Wherein does sensation differ 
from knowledge?: for in the case of genera that are very far 
apart, the differences are entirely obvious. 


Likeness should be studied, first, in the case of things belonging 
to different genera, the formulae being ‘A:B = C:D’ (e.g. as 
knowledge stands to the object of knowledge, so is sensation 
related to the object of sensation), and ‘As A is in B, so is C in D’ 

(e.g. as sight is in the eye, so is reason in the soul, and as is a 
calm in the sea, so is windlessness in the air). Practice is more 
especially needed in regard to terms that are far apart; for in the 
case of the rest, we shall be more easily able to see in one 
glance the points of likeness. We should also look at things 
which belong to the same genus, to see if any identical attribute 
belongs to them all, e.g. to a man and a horse and a dog; for in 
so far as they have any identical attribute, in so far they are 
alike. 
It is useful to have examined the number of meanings of a term 
both for clearness’ sake (for a man is more likely to know what 
it is he asserts, if it bas been made clear to him how many 
meanings it may have), and also with a view to ensuring that 
our reasonings shall be in accordance with the actual facts and 
not addressed merely to the term used. For as long as it is not 
clear in how many senses a term is used, it is possible that the 
answerer and the questioner are not directing their minds upon 
the same thing: whereas when once it has been made clear how 
many meanings there are, and also upon which of them the 
former directs his mind when he makes his assertion, the 


questioner would then look ridiculous if he failed to address his 
argument to this. It helps us also both to avoid being misled and 
to mislead by false reasoning: for if we know the number of 
meanings of a term, we shall certainly never be misled by false 
reasoning, but shall know if the questioner fails to address his 
argument to the same point; and when we ourselves put the 
questions we shall be able to mislead him, if our answerer 
happens not to know the number of meanings of our terms. 
This, however, is not possible in all cases, but only when of the 
many senses some are true and others are false. This manner of 
argument, however, does not belong properly to dialectic; 
dialecticians should therefore by all means beware of this kind 
of verbal discussion, unless any one is absolutely unable to 
discuss the subject before him in any other way. 

The discovery of the differences of things helps us both in 
reasonings about sameness and difference, and also in 
recognizing what any particular thing is. That it helps us in 
reasoning about sameness and difference is clear: for when we 
have discovered a difference of any kind whatever between the 
objects before us, we shall already have shown that they are not 
the same: while it helps us in recognizing what a thing is, 
because we usually distinguish the expression that is proper to 
the essence of each particular thing by means of the 
differentiae that are proper to it. 

The examination of likeness is useful with a view both to 
inductive arguments and to hypothetical reasonings, and also 
with a view to the rendering of definitions. It is useful for 
inductive arguments, because it is by means of an induction of 
individuals in cases that are alike that we claim to bring the 
universal in evidence: for it is not easy to do this if we do not 
know the points of likeness. It is useful for hypothetical 
reasonings because it is a general opinion that among similars 
what is true of one is true also of the rest. If, then, with regard 


to any of them we are well supplied with matter for a 
discussion, we shall secure a preliminary admission that 
however it is in these cases, so it is also in the case before us: 
then when we have shown the former we shall have shown, on 
the strength of the hypothesis, the matter before us as well: for 
we have first made the hypothesis that however it is in these 
cases, so it is also in the case before us, and have then proved 
the point as regards these cases. It is useful for the rendering of 
definitions because, if we are able to see in one glance what is 
the same in each individual case of it, we shall be at no loss into 
what genus we ought to put the object before us when we 
define it: for of the common predicates that which is most 
definitely in the category of essence is likely to be the genus. 
Likewise, also, in the case of objects widely divergent, the 
examination of likeness is useful for purposes of definition, e.g. 
the sameness of a calm at sea, and windlessness in the air (each 
being a form of rest), and of a point on a line and the unit in 
number – each being a starting point. If, then, we render as the 
genus what is common to all the cases, we shall get the credit 
of defining not inappropriately. Definition-mongers too nearly 
always render them in this way: they declare the unit to be the 
startingpoint of number, and the point the startingpoint of a 
line. It is clear, then, that they place them in that which is 
common to both as their genus. 

The means, then, whereby reasonings are effected, are these: 
the commonplace rules, for the observance of which the 
aforesaid means are useful, are as follows. 


Book II 


Of problems some are universal, others particular. Universal 
problems are such as ‘Every pleasure is good’ and ‘No pleasure 
is good’; particular problems are such as ‘Some pleasure is good’ 
and ‘Some pleasure is not good’. The methods of establishing 
and overthrowing a view universally are common to both kinds 
of problems; for when we have shown that a predicate belongs 
in every case, we shall also have shown that it belongs in some 
cases. Likewise, also, if we show that it does not belong in any 
case, we shall also have shown that it does not belong in every 
case. First, then, we must speak of the methods of overthrowing 
a view universally, because such are common to both universal 
and particular problems, and because people more usually 
introduce theses asserting a predicate than denying it, while 
those who argue with them overthrow it. The conversion of an 
appropriate name which is drawn from the element ‘accident’ is 
an extremely precarious thing; for in the case of accidents and 
in no other it is possible for something to be true conditionally 
and not universally. Names drawn from the elements 
‘definition’ and ‘property’ and ‘genus’ are bound to be 
convertible; e.g. if ‘to be an animal that walks on two feet is an 
attribute of S’, then it will be true by conversion to say that ‘S is 
an animal that walks on two feet’. Likewise, also, if drawn from 
the genus; for if ‘to be an animal is an attribute of S’, then ‘S is 
an animal’. The same is true also in the case of a property; for if 
‘to be capable of learning grammar is an attribute of S’, then ‘S 
will be capable of learning grammar’. For none of these 
attributes can possibly belong or not belong in part; they must 
either belong or not belong absolutely. In the case of accidents, 


on the other hand, there is nothing to prevent an attribute (e.g. 
whiteness or justice) belonging in part, so that it is not enough 
to show that whiteness or justice is an attribute of a man in 
order to show that he is white or just; for it is open to dispute it 
and say that he is white or just in part only. Conversion, then, is 
not a necessary process in the case of accidents. 

We must also define the errors that occur in problems. They are 
of two kinds, caused either by false statement or by 
transgression of the established diction. For those who make 
false statements, and say that an attribute belongs to thing 
which does not belong to it, commit error; and those who call 
objects by the names of other objects (e.g. calling a planetree a 
‘man’) transgress the established terminology. 

Now one commonplace rule is to look and see if a man has 
ascribed as an accident what belongs in some other way. This 
mistake is most commonly made in regard to the genera of 
things, e.g. if one were to say that white happens (accidit) to be 
a colour – for being a colour does not happen by accident to 
white, but colour is its genus. The assertor may of course define 
it so in so many words, saying (e.g.) that ‘Justice happens 
(accidit) to be a virtue’; but often even without such definition it 
is obvious that he has rendered the genus as an accident; e.g. 
suppose that one were to say that whiteness is coloured or that 
walking is in motion. For a predicate drawn from the genus is 
never ascribed to the species in an inflected form, but always 
the genera are predicated of their species literally; for the 
species take on both the name and the definition of their 
genera. A man therefore who says that white is ‘coloured’ has 


not rendered ‘coloured’ as its genus, seeing that he has used an 
inflected form, nor yet as its property or as its definition: for the 
definition and property of a thing belong to it and to nothing 
else, whereas many things besides white are coloured, e.g. a log, 
a stone, a man, and a horse. Clearly then he renders it as an 
accident. 

Another rule is to examine all cases where a predicate has been 
either asserted or denied universally to belong to something. 
Look at them species by species, and not in their infinite 
multitude: for then the inquiry will proceed more directly and 
in fewer steps. You should look and begin with the most 
primary groups, and then proceed in order down to those that 
are not further divisible: e.g. if a man has said that the 
knowledge of opposites is the same, you should look and see 
whether it be so of relative opposites and of contraries and of 
terms signifying the privation or presence of certain states, and 
of contradictory terms. Then, if no clear result be reached so far 
in these cases, you should again divide these until you come to 
those that are not further divisible, and see (e.g.) whether it be 
so of just deeds and unjust, or of the double and the half, or of 
blindness and sight, or of being and not-being: for if in any case 
it be shown that the knowledge of them is not the same we 
shall have demolished the problem. Likewise, also, if the 
predicate belongs in no case. This rule is convertible for both 
destructive and constructive purposes: for if, when we have 
suggested a division, the predicate appears to hold in all or in a 
large number of cases, we may then claim that the other should 
actually assert it universally, or else bring a negative instance to 
show in what case it is not so: for if he does neither of these 
things, a refusal to assert it will make him look absurd. 

Another rule is to make definitions both of an accident and of 
its subject, either of both separately or else of one of them, and 
then look and see if anything untrue has been assumed as true 


in the definitions. Thus (e.g.) to see if it is possible to wrong a 
god, ask what is ‘to wrong’? For if it be ‘to injure deliberately’, 
clearly it is not possible for a god to be wronged: for it is 
impossible that God should be injured. Again, to see if the good 
man is jealous, ask who is the ‘jealous’ man and what is 
‘jealousy’. For if ‘jealousy’ is pain at the apparent success of 
some well-behaved person, clearly the good man is not jealous: 
for then he would be bad. Again, to see if the indignant man is 
jealous, ask who each of them is: for then it will be obvious 
whether the statement is true or false; e.g. if he is ‘jealous’ who 
grieves at the successes of the good, and he is ‘indignant’ who 
grieves at the successes of the evil, then clearly the indignant 
man would not be jealous. A man should substitute definitions 
also for the terms contained in his definitions, and not stop 
until he comes to a familiar term: for often if the definition be 
rendered whole, the point at issue is not cleared up, whereas if 
for one of the terms used in the definition a definition be stated, 
it becomes obvious. 

Moreover, a man should make the problem into a proposition 
for himself, and then bring a negative instance against it: for the 
negative instance will be a ground of attack upon the assertion. 
This rule is very nearly the same as the rule to look into cases 
where a predicate has been attributed or denied universally: but 
it differs in the turn of the argument. 

Moreover, you should define what kind of things should be 
called as most men call them, and what should not. For this is 
useful both for establishing and for overthrowing a view: e.g. 
you should say that we ought to use our terms to mean the 
same things as most people mean by them, but when we ask 
what kind of things are or are not of such and such a kind, we 
should not here go with the multitude: e.g. it is right to call 
‘healthy’ whatever tends to produce health, as do most men: 
but in saying whether the object before us tends to produce 


health or not, we should adopt the language no longer of the 
multitude but of the doctor. 

Moreover, if a term be used in several senses, and it has been 
laid down that it is or that it is not an attribute of S, you should 
show your case of one of its several senses, if you cannot show 
it of both. This rule is to be observed in cases where the 
difference of meaning is undetected; for supposing this to be 
obvious, then the other man will object that the point which he 
himself questioned has not been discussed, but only the other 
point. This commonplace rule is convertible for purposes both 
of establishing and of overthrowing a view. For if we want to 
establish a statement, we shall show that in one sense the 
attribute belongs, if we cannot show it of both senses: whereas 
if we are overthrowing a statement, we shall show that in one 
sense the attribute does not belong, if we cannot show it of both 
senses. Of course, in overthrowing a statement there is no need 
to start the discussion by securing any admission, either when 
the statement asserts or when it denies the attribute 
universally: for if we show that in any case whatever the 
attribute does not belong, we shall have demolished the 
universal assertion of it, and likewise also if we show that it 
belongs in a single case, we shall demolish the universal denial 
of it. Whereas in establishing a statement we ought to secure a 
preliminary admission that if it belongs in any case whatever, it 
belongs universally, supposing this claim to be a plausible one. 
For it is not enough to discuss a single instance in order to show 
that an attribute belongs universally; e.g. to argue that if the 
soul of man be immortal, then every soul is immortal, so that a 
previous admission must be secured that if any soul whatever 


be immortal, then every soul is immortal. This is not to be done 
in every case, but only whenever we are not easily able to quote 
any single argument applying to all cases in common, as (e.g.) 
the geometrician can argue that the triangle has its angles 
equal to two right angles. 

If, again, the variety of meanings of a term be obvious, 
distinguish how many meanings it has before proceeding either 
to demolish or to establish it: e.g. supposing ‘the right’ to mean 
‘the expedient’ or ‘the honourable’, you should try either to 
establish or to demolish both descriptions of the subject in 
question; e.g. by showing that it is honourable and expedient, or 
that it is neither honourable nor expedient. Supposing, however, 
that it is impossible to show both, you should show the one, 
adding an indication that it is true in the one sense and not in 
the other. The same rule applies also when the number of 
senses into which it is divided is more than two. 

Again, consider those expressions whose meanings are many, 
but differ not by way of ambiguity of a term, but in some other 
way: e.g. ‘The science of many things is one’: here ‘many things’ 
may mean the end and the means to that end, as (e.g.) medicine 
is the science both of producing health and of dieting; or they 
may be both of them ends, as the science of contraries is said to 
be the same (for of contraries the one is no more an end than 
the other); or again they may be an essential and an accidental 
attribute, as (e.g.) the essential fact that the triangle has its 
angles equal to two right angles, and the accidental fact that the 
equilateral figure has them so: for it is because of the accident 
of the equilateral triangle happening to be a triangle that we 
know that it has its angles equal to two right angles. If, then, it 
is not possible in any sense of the term that the science of 
many things should be the same, it clearly is altogether 
impossible that it should be so; or, if it is possible in some sense, 
then clearly it is possible. Distinguish as many meanings as are 


required: e.g. if we want to establish a view, we should bring 
forward all such meanings as admit that view and should divide 
them only into those meanings which also are required for the 
establishment of our case: whereas if we want to overthrow a 
view, we should bring forward all that do not admit that view, 
and leave the rest aside. We must deal also in these cases as 
well with any uncertainty about the number of meanings 
involved. Further, that one thing is, or is not, ‘of’ another should 
be established by means of the same commonplace rules; e.g. 
that a particular science is of a particular thing, treated either 
as an end or as a means to its end, or as accidentally connected 
with it; or again that it is not ‘of’ it in any of the aforesaid ways. 
The same rule holds true also of desire and all other terms that 
have more than one object. For the ‘desire of X’ may mean the 
desire of it as an end (e.g. the desire of health) or as a means to 
an end (e.g. the desire of being doctored), or as a thing desired 
accidentally, as, in the case of wine, the sweet-toothed person 
desires it not because it is wine but because it is sweet. For 
essentially he desires the sweet, and only accidentally the wine: 
for if it be dry, he no longer desires it. His desire for it is 
therefore accidental. This rule is useful in dealing with relative 
terms: for cases of this kind are generally cases of relative 
terms. 

Moreover, it is well to alter a term into one more familiar, e.g. to 
substitute ‘clear’ for ‘exact’ in describing a conception, and 
‘being fussy’ for ‘being busy’: for when the expression is made 
more familiar, the thesis becomes easier to attack. This 
commonplace rule also is available for both purposes alike, both 
for establishing and for overthrowing a view. 


In order to show that contrary attributes belong to the same 
thing, look at its genus; e.g. if we want to show that rightness 
and wrongness are possible in regard to perception, and to 
perceive is to judge, while it is possible to judge rightly or 
wrongly, then in regard to perception as well rightness and 
wrongness must be possible. In the present instance the proof 
proceeds from the genus and relates to the species: for ‘to 
judge’ is the genus of ‘to perceive’; for the man who perceives 
judges in a certain way. But per contra it may proceed from the 
species to the genus: for all the attributes that belong to the 
species belong to the genus as well; e.g. if there is a bad and a 
good knowledge there is also a bad and a good disposition: for 
‘disposition’ is the genus of knowledge. Now the former 
commonplace argument is fallacious for purposes of 
establishing a view, while the second is true. For there is no 
necessity that all the attributes that belong to the genus should 
belong also to the species; for ‘animal’ is flying and quadruped, 
but not so ‘man’. All the attributes, on the other hand, that 
belong to the species must of necessity belong also to the 
genus; for if ‘man’ is good, then animal also is good. On the 
other hand, for purposes of overthrowing a view, the former 
argument is true while the latter is fallacious; for all the 
attributes which do not belong to the genus do not belong to the 
species either; whereas all those that are wanting to the species 
are not of necessity wanting to the genus. 

Since those things of which the genus is predicated must also of 
necessity have one of its species predicated of them, and since 
those things that are possessed of the genus in question, or are 
described by terms derived from that genus, must also of 
necessity be possessed of one of its species or be described by 
terms derived from one of its species (e.g. if to anything the 
term ‘scientific knowledge’ be applied, then also there will be 
applied to it the term ‘grammatical’ or ‘musical’ knowledge, or 
knowledge of one of the other sciences; and if any one 


possesses scientific knowledge or is described by a term derived 
from ‘science’, then he will also possess grammatical or musical 
knowledge or knowledge of one of the other sciences, or will be 
described by a term derived from one of them, e.g. as a 
‘grammarian’ or a ‘musician’) – therefore if any expression be 
asserted that is in any way derived from the genus (e.g. that the 
soul is in motion), look and see whether it be possible for the 
soul to be moved with any of the species of motion; whether 
(e.g.) it can grow or be destroyed or come to be, and so forth 
with all the other species of motion. For if it be not moved in 
any of these ways, clearly it does not move at all. This 
commonplace rule is common for both purposes, both for 
overthrowing and for establishing a view: for if the soul moves 
with one of the species of motion, clearly it does move; while if 
it does not move with any of the species of motion, clearly it 
does not move. 

If you are not well equipped with an argument against the 
assertion, look among the definitions, real or apparent, of the 
thing before you, and if one is not enough, draw upon several. 
For it will be easier to attack people when committed to a 
definition: for an attack is always more easily made on 
definitions. 

Moreover, look and see in regard to the thing in question, what 
it is whose reality conditions the reality of the thing in question, 
or what it is whose reality necessarily follows if the thing in 
question be real: if you wish to establish a view inquire what 
there is on whose reality the reality of the thing in question will 
follow (for if the former be shown to be real, then the thing in 
question will also have been shown to be real); while if you 
want to overthrow a view, ask what it is that is real if the thing 
in question be real, for if we show that what follows from the 
thing in question is unreal, we shall have demolished the thing 
in question. 


Moreover, look at the time involved, to see if there be any 
discrepancy anywhere: e.g. suppose a man to have stated that 
what is being nourished of necessity grows: for animals are 
always of necessity being nourished, but they do not always 
grow. Likewise, also, if he has said that knowing is 
remembering: for the one is concerned with past time, whereas 
the other has to do also with the present and the future. For we 
are said to know things present and future (e.g. that there will 
be an eclipse), whereas it is impossible to remember anything 
save what is in the past. 

Moreover, there is the sophistic turn of argument, whereby we 
draw our opponent into the kind of statement against which we 
shall be well supplied with lines of argument. This process is 
sometimes a real necessity, sometimes an apparent necessity, 
sometimes neither an apparent nor a real necessity. It is really 
necessary whenever the answerer has denied any view that 
would be useful in attacking the thesis, and the questioner 
thereupon addresses his arguments to the support of this view, 
and when moreover the view in question happens to be one of a 
kind on which he has a good stock of lines of argument. 
Likewise, also, it is really necessary whenever he (the 
questioner) first, by an induction made by means of the view 
laid down, arrives at a certain statement and then tries to 
demolish that statement: for when once this has been 
demolished, the view originally laid down is demolished as well. 
It is an apparent necessity, when the point to which the 
discussion comes to be directed appears to be useful, and 
relevant to the thesis, without being really so; whether it be that 
the man who is standing up to the argument has refused to 


concede something, or whether he (the questioner) has first 
reached it by a plausible induction based upon the thesis and 
then tries to demolish it. The remaining case is when the point 
to which the discussion comes to be directed is neither really 
nor apparently necessary, and it is the answerer’s luck to be 
confuted on a mere side issue You should beware of the last of 
the aforesaid methods; for it appears to be wholly disconnected 
from, and foreign to, the art of dialectic. For this reason, 
moreover, the answerer should not lose his temper, but assent 
to those statements that are of no use in attacking the thesis, 
adding an indication whenever he assents although he does not 
agree with the view. For, as a rule, it increases the confusion of 
questioners if, after all propositions of this kind have been 
granted them, they can then draw no conclusion. 

Moreover, any one who has made any statement whatever has 
in a certain sense made several statements, inasmuch as each 
statement has a number of necessary consequences: e.g. the 
man who said ‘X is a man’ has also said that it is an animal and 
that it is animate and a biped and capable of acquiring reason 
and knowledge, so that by the demolition of any single one of 
these consequences, of whatever kind, the original statement is 
demolished as well. But you should beware here too of making a 
change to a more difficult subject: for sometimes the 
consequence, and sometimes the original thesis, is the easier to 
demolish. 

In regard to subjects which must have one and one only of two 
predicates, as (e.g.) a man must have either a disease or health, 
supposing we are well supplied as regards the one for arguing 



its presence or absence, we shall be well equipped as regards 
the remaining one as well. This rule is convertible for both 
purposes: for when we have shown that the one attribute 
belongs, we shall have shown that the remaining one does not 
belong; while if we show that the one does not belong, we shall 
have shown that the remaining one does belong. Clearly then 
the rule is useful for both purposes. 

Moreover, you may devise a line of attack by reinterpreting a 
term in its literal meaning, with the implication that it is most 
fitting so to take it rather than in its established meaning: e.g. 
the expression ‘strong at heart’ will suggest not the courageous 
man, according to the use now established, but the man the 
state of whose heart is strong; just as also the expression ‘of a 
good hope’ may be taken to mean the man who hopes for good 
things. Likewise also ‘well-starred’ may be taken to mean the 
man whose star is good, as Xenocrates says ‘well-starred is he 
who has a noble soul’.’ For a man’s star is his soul. 

Some things occur of necessity, others usually, others however it 
may chance; if therefore a necessary event has been asserted to 
occur usually, or if a usual event (or, failing such an event itself, 
its contrary) has been stated to occur of necessity, it always 
gives an opportunity for attack. For if a necessary event has 
been asserted to occur usually, clearly the speaker has denied 
an attribute to be universal which is universal, and so has made 
a mistake: and so he has if he has declared the usual attribute 
to be necessary: for then he declares it to belong universally 
when it does not so belong. Likewise also if he has declared the 
contrary of what is usual to be necessary. For the contrary of a 
usual attribute is always a comparatively rare attribute: e.g. if 
men are usually bad, they are comparatively seldom good, so 
that his mistake is even worse if he has declared them to be 
good of necessity. The same is true also if he has declared a 
mere matter of chance to happen of necessity or usually; for a 


chance event happens neither of necessity nor usually. If the 
thing happens usually, then even supposing his statement does 
not distinguish whether he meant that it happens usually or 
that it happens necessarily, it is open to you to discuss it on the 
assumption that he meant that it happens necessarily: e.g. if he 
has stated without any distinction that disinherited persons are 
bad, you may assume in discussing it that he means that they 
are so necessarily. 

Moreover, look and see also if he has stated a thing to be an 
accident of itself, taking it to be a different thing because it has 
a different name, as Prodicus used to divide pleasures into joy 
and delight and good cheer: for all these are names of the same 
thing, to wit, Pleasure. If then any one says that joyfulness is an 
accidental attribute of cheerfulness, he would be declaring it to 
be an accidental attribute of itself. 

Inasmuch as contraries can be conjoined with each other in six 
ways, and four of these conjunctions constitute a contrariety, 
we must grasp the subject of contraries, in order that it may 
help us both in demolishing and in establishing a view. Well 
then, that the modes of conjunction are six is clear: for either (1) 
each of the contrary verbs will be conjoined to each of the 
contrary objects; and this gives two modes: e.g. to do good to 
friends and to do evil to enemies, or per contra to do evil to 
friends and to do good to enemies. Or else (2) both verbs may be 
attached to one object; and this too gives two modes, e.g. to do 
good to friends and to do evil to friends, or to do good to 
enemies and to do evil to enemies. Or (3) a single verb may be 
attached to both objects: and this also gives two modes; e.g. to 


do good to friends and to do good to enemies, or to do evil to 
friends and evil to enemies. 

The first two then of the aforesaid conjunctions do not 
constitute any contrariety; for the doing of good to friends is not 
contrary to the doing of evil to enemies: for both courses are 
desirable and belong to the same disposition. Nor is the doing of 
evil to friends contrary to the doing of good to enemies: for both 
of these are objectionable and belong to the same disposition: 
and one objectionable thing is not generally thought to be the 
contrary of another, unless the one be an expression denoting 
an excess, and the other an expression denoting a defect: for an 
excess is generally thought to belong to the class of 
objectionable things, and likewise also a defect. But the other 
four all constitute a contrariety. For to do good to friends is 
contrary to the doing of evil to friends: for it proceeds from the 
contrary disposition, and the one is desirable, and the other 
objectionable. The case is the same also in regard to the other 
conjunctions: for in each combination the one course is 
desirable, and the other objectionable, and the one belongs to a 
reasonable disposition and the other to a bad. Clearly, then, 
from what has been said, the same course has more than one 
contrary. For the doing of good to friends has as its contrary 
both the doing of good to enemies and the doing of evil to 
friends. Likewise, if we examine them in the same way, we shall 
find that the contraries of each of the others also are two in 
number. Select therefore whichever of the two contraries is 
useful in attacking the thesis. 

Moreover, if the accident of a thing have a contrary, see whether 
it belongs to the subject to which the accident in question has 
been declared to belong: for if the latter belongs the former 
could not belong; for it is impossible that contrary predicates 
should belong at the same time to the same thing. 


Or again, look and see if anything has been said about 
something, of such a kind that if it be true, contrary predicates 
must necessarily belong to the thing: e.g. if he has said that the 
‘Ideas’ exist in us. For then the result will be that they are both 
in motion and at rest, and moreover that they are objects both 
of sensation and of thought. For according to the views of those 
who posit the existence of Ideas, those Ideas are at rest and are 
objects of thought; while if they exist in us, it is impossible that 
they should be unmoved: for when we move, it follows 
necessarily that all that is in us moves with us as well. Clearly 
also they are objects of sensation, if they exist in us: for it is 
through the sensation of sight that we recognize the Form 
present in each individual. 

Again, if there be posited an accident which has a contrary, look 
and see if that which admits of the accident will admit of its 
contrary as well: for the same thing admits of contraries. Thus 
(e.g.) if he has asserted that hatred follows anger, hatred would 
in that case be in the ‘spirited faculty’: for that is where anger is. 
You should therefore look and see if its contrary, to wit, 
friendship, be also in the ‘spirited faculty’: for if not – if 
friendship is in the faculty of desire – then hatred could not 
follow anger. Likewise also if he has asserted that the faculty of 
desire is ignorant. For if it were capable of ignorance, it would be 
capable of knowledge as well: and this is not generally held – I 
mean that the faculty of desire is capable of knowledge. For 
purposes, then, of overthrowing a view, as has been said, this 
rule should be observed: but for purposes of establishing one, 
though the rule will not help you to assert that the accident 
actually belongs, it will help you to assert that it may possibly 
belong. For having shown that the thing in question will not 
admit of the contrary of the accident asserted, we shall have 
shown that the accident neither belongs nor can possibly 
belong; while on the other hand, if we show that the contrary 
belongs, or that the thing is capable of the contrary, we shall not 


indeed as yet have shown that the accident asserted does 
belong as well; our proof will merely have gone to this point, 
that it is possible for it to belong. 

Seeing that the modes of opposition are four in number, you 
should look for arguments among the contradictories of your 
terms, converting the order of their sequence, both when 
demolishing and when establishing a view, and you should 
secure them by means of induction – such arguments (e.g.) as 
that man be an animal, what is not an animal is not a man’: 
and likewise also in other instances of contradictories. For in 
those cases the sequence is converse: for ‘animal’ follows upon 
‘man but ‘not-animal’ does not follow upon ‘not-man’, but 
conversely ‘not-man’ upon ‘not-animal’. In all cases, therefore, a 
postulate of this sort should be made, (e.g.) that ‘If the 
honourable is pleasant, what is not pleasant is not honourable, 
while if the latter be untrue, so is the former’. Likewise, also, ‘If 
what is not pleasant be not honourable, then what is 
honourable is pleasant’. Clearly, then, the conversion of the 
sequence formed by contradiction of the terms of the thesis is a 
method convertible for both purposes. 

Then look also at the case of the contraries of S and P in the 
thesis, and see if the contrary of the one follows upon the 
contrary of the other, either directly or conversely, both when 
you are demolishing and when you are establishing a view: 
secure arguments of this kind as well by means of induction, so 
far as may be required. Now the sequence is direct in a case 
such as that of courage and cowardice: for upon the one of 
them virtue follows, and vice upon the other; and upon the one 


it follows that it is desirable, while upon the other it follows that 
it is objectionable. The sequence, therefore, in the latter case 
also is direct; for the desirable is the contrary of the 
objectionable. Likewise also in other cases. The sequence is, on 
the other hand, converse in such a case as this: Health follows 
upon vigour, but disease does not follow upon debility; rather 
debility follows upon disease. In this case, then, clearly the 
sequence is converse. Converse sequence is, however, rare in 
the case of contraries; usually the sequence is direct. If, 
therefore, the contrary of the one term does not follow upon the 
contrary of the other either directly or conversely, clearly 
neither does the one term follow upon the other in the 
statement made: whereas if the one followed the other in the 
case of the contraries, it must of necessity do so as well in the 
original statement. 

You should look also into cases of the privation or presence of a 
state in like manner to the case of contraries. Only, in the case 
of such privations the converse sequence does not occur: the 
sequence is always bound to be direct: e.g. as sensation follows 
sight, while absence of sensation follows blindness. For the 
opposition of sensation to absence of sensation is an opposition 
of the presence to the privation of a state: for the one of them is 
a state, and the other the privation of it. 

The case of relative terms should also be studied in like manner 
to that of a state and its privation: for the sequence of these as 
well is direct; e.g. if 3/1 is a multiple, then 1/3 is a fraction: for 
3/1 is relative to 1/3, and so is a multiple to a fraction. Again, if 
knowledge be a conceiving, then also the object of knowledge is 
an object of conception; and if sight be a sensation, then also 
the object of sight is an object of sensation. An objection may be 
made that there is no necessity for the sequence to take place, 
in the case of relative terms, in the way described: for the object 
of sensation is an object of knowledge, whereas sensation is not 


knowledge. The objection is, however, not generally received as 
really true; for many people deny that there is knowledge of 
objects of sensation. Moreover, the principle stated is just as 
useful for the contrary purpose, e.g. to show that the object of 
sensation is not an object of knowledge, on the ground that 
neither is sensation knowledge. 

Again look at the case of the co-ordinates and inflected forms of 
the terms in the thesis, both in demolishing and in establishing 
it. By co-ordinates’ are meant terms such as the following: ‘Just 
deeds’ and the ‘just man’ are coordinates of ‘justice’, and 
‘courageous deeds’ and the ‘courageous man’ are co-ordinates 
of courage. Likewise also things that tend to produce and to 
preserve anything are called co-ordinates of that which they 
tend to produce and to preserve, as e.g. ‘healthy habits’ are coordinates 
of ‘health’ and a ‘vigorous constitutional’ of a 
‘vigorous constitution’ and so forth also in other cases. ‘Coordinate’, 
then, usually describes cases such as these, whereas 
‘inflected forms’ are such as the following: ‘justly’, 
‘courageously’, ‘healthily’, and such as are formed in this way. It 
is usually held that words when used in their inflected forms as 
well are co-ordinates, as (e.g.) ‘justly’ in relation to justice, and 
‘courageously’ to courage; and then ‘co-ordinate’ describes all 
the members of the same kindred series, e.g. ‘justice’, ‘just’, of a 
man or an act, ‘justly’. Clearly, then, when any one member, 
whatever its kind, of the same kindred series is shown to be 
good or praiseworthy, then all the rest as well come to be shown 
to be so: e.g. if ‘justice’ be something praiseworthy, then so will 
‘just’, of a man or thing, and ‘justly’ connote something 
praiseworthy. Then ‘justly’ will be rendered also ‘praiseworthily’, 


derived will by the same inflexion from ‘the praiseworthy’ 
whereby ‘justly’ is derived from ‘justice’. 

Look not only in the case of the subject mentioned, but also in 
the case of its contrary, for the contrary predicate: e.g. argue 
that good is not necessarily pleasant; for neither is evil painful: 
or that, if the latter be the case, so is the former. Also, if justice 
be knowledge, then injustice is ignorance: and if ‘justly’ means 
‘knowingly’ and ‘skilfully’, then ‘unjustly’ means ‘ignorantly’ 
and ‘unskilfully’: whereas if the latter be not true, neither is the 
former, as in the instance given just now: for ‘unjustly’ is more 
likely to seem equivalent to ‘skilfully’ than to ‘unskilfully’. This 
commonplace rule has been stated before in dealing with the 
sequence of contraries; for all we are claiming now is that the 
contrary of P shall follow the contrary of S. 

Moreover, look at the modes of generation and destruction of a 
thing, and at the things which tend to produce or to destroy it, 
both in demolishing and in establishing a view. For those things 
whose modes of generation rank among good things, are 
themselves also good; and if they themselves be good, so also 
are their modes of generation. If, on the other hand, their 
modes of generation be evil, then they themselves also are evil. 
In regard to modes of destruction the converse is true: for if the 
modes of destruction rank as good things, then they themselves 
rank as evil things; whereas if the modes of destruction count 
as evil, they themselves count as good. The same argument 
applies also to things tending to produce and destroy: for things 
whose productive causes are good, themselves also rank as 
good; whereas if causes destructive of them are good, they 
themselves rank as evil. 


Again, look at things which are like the subject in question, and 
see if they are in like case; e.g. if one branch of knowledge has 
more than one object, so also will one opinion; and if to possess 
sight be to see, then also to possess hearing will be to hear. 
Likewise also in the case of other things, both those which are 
and those which are generally held to be like. The rule in 
question is useful for both purposes; for if it be as stated in the 
case of some one like thing, it is so with the other like things as 
well, whereas if it be not so in the case of some one of them, 
neither is it so in the case of the others. Look and see also 
whether the cases are alike as regards a single thing and a 
number of things: for sometimes there is a discrepancy. Thus, if 
to ‘know’ a thing be to ‘think of’ it, then also to ‘know many 
things’ is to ‘be thinking of many things’; whereas this is not 
true; for it is possible to know many things but not to be 
thinking of them. If, then, the latter proposition be not true, 
neither was the former that dealt with a single thing, viz. that to 
‘know’ a thing is to ‘think of’ it. 

Moreover, argue from greater and less degrees. In regard to 
greater degrees there are four commonplace rules. One is: See 
whether a greater degree of the predicate follows a greater 
degree of the subject: e.g. if pleasure be good, see whether also a 
greater pleasure be a greater good: and if to do a wrong be evil, 
see whether also to do a greater wrong is a greater evil. Now 
this rule is of use for both purposes: for if an increase of the 
accident follows an increase of the subject, as we have said, 
clearly the accident belongs; while if it does not follow, the 
accident does not belong. You should establish this by 
induction. Another rule is: If one predicate be attributed to two 
subjects; then supposing it does not belong to the subject to 
which it is the more likely to belong, neither does it belong 
where it is less likely to belong; while if it does belong where it 


is less likely to belong, then it belongs as well where it is more 
likely. Again: If two predicates be attributed to one subject, then 
if the one which is more generally thought to belong does not 
belong, neither does the one that is less generally thought to 
belong; or, if the one that is less generally thought to belong 
does belong, so also does the other. Moreover: If two predicates 
be attributed to two subjects, then if the one which is more 
usually thought to belong to the one subject does not belong, 
neither does the remaining predicate belong to the remaining 
subject; or, if the one which is less usually thought to belong to 
the one subject does belong, so too does the remaining 
predicate to the remaining subject. 

Moreover, you can argue from the fact that an attribute belongs, 
or is generally supposed to belong, in a like degree, in three 
ways, viz. those described in the last three rules given in regard 
to a greater degree.’ For supposing that one predicate belongs, or 
is supposed to belong, to two subjects in a like degree, then if it 
does not belong to the one, neither does it belong to the other; 
while if it belongs to the one, it belongs to the remaining one as 
well. Or, supposing two predicates to belong in a like degree to 
the same subject, then, if the one does not belong, neither does 
the remaining one; while if the one does belong, the remaining 
one belongs as well. The case is the same also if two predicates 
belong in a like degree to two subjects; for if the one predicate 
does not belong to the one subject, neither does the remaining 
predicate belong to the remaining subject, while if the one 
predicate does belong to the one subject, the remaining 
predicate belongs to the remaining subject as well. 


You can argue, then, from greater or less or like degrees of truth 
in the aforesaid number of ways. Moreover, you should argue 
from the addition of one thing to another. If the addition of one 
thing to another makes that other good or white, whereas 
formerly it was not white or good, then the thing added will be 
white or good – it will possess the character it imparts to the 
whole as well. Moreover, if an addition of something to a given 
object intensifies the character which it had as given, then the 
thing added will itself as well be of that character. Likewise, 
also, in the case of other attributes. The rule is not applicable in 
all cases, but only in those in which the excess described as an 
‘increased intensity’ is found to take place. The above rule is, 
however, not convertible for overthrowing a view. For if the 
thing added does not make the other good, it is not thereby 
made clear whether in itself it may not be good: for the addition 
of good to evil does not necessarily make the whole good, any 
more than the addition of white to black makes the whole 
white. 

Again, any predicate of which we can speak of greater or less 
degrees belongs also absolutely: for greater or less degrees of 
good or of white will not be attributed to what is not good or 
white: for a bad thing will never be said to have a greater or less 
degree of goodness than another, but always of badness. This 
rule is not convertible, either, for the purpose of overthrowing a 
predication: for several predicates of which we cannot speak of 
a greater degree belong absolutely: for the term ‘man’ is not 
attributed in greater and less degrees, but a man is a man for all 
that. 

You should examine in the same way predicates attributed in a 
given respect, and at a given time and place: for if the predicate 
be possible in some respect, it is possible also absolutely. 


Likewise, also, is what is predicated at a given time or place: for 
what is absolutely impossible is not possible either in any 
respect or at any place or time. An objection may be raised that 
in a given respect people may be good by nature, e.g. they may 
be generous or temperately inclined, while absolutely they are 
not good by nature, because no one is prudent by nature. 
Likewise, also, it is possible for a destructible thing to escape 
destruction at a given time, whereas it is not possible for it to 
escape absolutely. In the same way also it is a good thing at 
certain places to follow see and such a diet, e.g. in infected 
areas, though it is not a good thing absolutely. Moreover, in 
certain places it is possible to live singly and alone, but 
absolutely it is not possible to exist singly and alone. In the 
same way also it is in certain places honourable to sacrifice 
one’s father, e.g. among the Triballi, whereas, absolutely, it is not 
honourable. Or possibly this may indicate a relativity not to 
places but to persons: for it is all the same wherever they may 
be: for everywhere it will be held honourable among the Triballi 
themselves, just because they are Triballi. Again, at certain 
times it is a good thing to take medicines, e.g. when one is ill, 
but it is not so absolutely. Or possibly this again may indicate a 
relativity not to a certain time, but to a certain state of health: 
for it is all the same whenever it occurs, if only one be in that 
state. A thing is ‘absolutely’ so which without any addition you 
are prepared to say is honourable or the contrary. Thus (e.g.) you 
will deny that to sacrifice one’s father is honourable: it is 
honourable only to certain persons: it is not therefore 
honourable absolutely. On the other hand, to honour the gods 
you will declare to be honourable without adding anything, 
because that is honourable absolutely. So that whatever without 
any addition is generally accounted to be honourable or 
dishonourable or anything else of that kind, will be said to be so 
‘absolutely’. 


Book III 


The question which is the more desirable, or the better, of two 
or more things, should be examined upon the following lines: 
only first of all it must be clearly laid down that the inquiry we 
are making concerns not things that are widely divergent and 
that exhibit great differences from one another (for nobody 
raises any doubt whether happiness or wealth is more 
desirable), but things that are nearly related and about which 
we commonly discuss for which of the two we ought rather to 
vote, because we do not see any advantage on either side as 
compared with the other. Clearly, in such cases if we can show a 
single advantage, or more than one, our judgement will record 
our assent that whichever side happens to have the advantage 
is the more desirable. 

First, then, that which is more lasting or secure is more 
desirable than that which is less so: and so is that which is 
more likely to be chosen by the prudent or by the good man or 
by the right law, or by men who are good in any particular line, 
when they make their choice as such, or by the experts in 
regard to any particular class of things; i.e. either whatever most 
of them or what all of them would choose; e.g. in medicine or in 
carpentry those things are more desirable which most, or all, 
doctors would choose; or, in general, whatever most men or all 
men or all things would choose, e.g. the good: for everything 
aims at the good. You should direct the argument you intend to 


employ to whatever purpose you require. Of what is ‘better’ or 
‘more desirable’ the absolute standard is the verdict of the 
better science, though relatively to a given individual the 
standard may be his own particular science. 

In the second place, that which is known as ‘an x’ is more 
desirable than that which does not come within the genus ‘x’ – 

e.g. justice than a just man; for the former falls within the 
genus ‘good’, whereas the other does not, and the former is 
called ‘a good’, whereas the latter is not: for nothing which does 
not happen to belong to the genus in question is called by the 
generic name; e.g. a ‘white man’ is not ‘a colour’. Likewise also 
in other cases. 
Also, that which is desired for itself is more desirable than that 
which is desired for something else; e.g. health is more 
desirable than gymnastics: for the former is desired for itself, 
the latter for something else. Also, that which is desirable in 
itself is more desirable than what is desirable per accidens; e.g. 
justice in our friends than justice in our enemies: for the former 
is desirable in itself, the latter per accidens: for we desire that 
our enemies should be just per accidens, in order that they may 
do us no harm. This last principle is the same as the one that 
precedes it, with, however, a different turn of expression. For we 
desire justice in our friends for itself, even though it will make 
no difference to us, and even though they be in India; whereas 
in our enemies we desire it for something else, in order that 
they may do us no harm. 

Also, that which is in itself the cause of good is more desirable 
than what is so per accidens, e.g. virtue than luck (for the 
former in itself, and the latter per accidens, the cause of good 
things), and so in other cases of the same kind. Likewise also in 
the case of the contrary; for what is in itself the cause of evil is 
more objectionable than what is so per accidens, e.g. vice and 


chance: for the one is bad in itself, whereas chance is so per 
accidens. 

Also, what is good absolutely is more desirable than what is 
good for a particular person, e.g. recovery of health than a 
surgical operation; for the former is good absolutely, the latter 
only for a particular person, viz. the man who needs an 
operation. So too what is good by nature is more desirable than 
the good that is not so by nature, e.g. justice than the just man; 
for the one is good by nature, whereas in the other case the 
goodness is acquired. Also the attribute is more desirable which 
belongs to the better and more honourable subject, e.g. to a god 
rather than to a man, and to the soul rather than to the body. So 
too the property of the better thing is better than the property 
of the worse; e.g. the property of God than the property of man: 
for whereas in respect of what is common in both of them they 
do not differ at all from each other, in respect of their properties 
the one surpasses the other. Also that is better which is 
inherent in things better or prior or more honourable: thus (e.g.) 
health is better than strength and beauty: for the former is 
inherent in the moist and the dry, and the hot and the cold, in 
fact in all the primary constituents of an animal, whereas the 
others are inherent in what is secondary, strength being a 
feature of the sinews and bones, while beauty is generally 
supposed to consist in a certain symmetry of the limbs. Also the 
end is generally supposed to be more desirable than the means, 
and of two means, that which lies nearer the end. In general, 
too, a means directed towards the end of life is more desirable 
than a means to anything else, e.g. that which contributes to 
happiness than that which contributes to prudence. Also the 
competent is more desirable than the incompetent. Moreover, of 
two productive agents that one is more desirable whose end is 
better; while between a productive agent and an end we can 
decide by a proportional sum whenever the excess of the one 
end over the other is greater than that of the latter over its own 


productive means: e.g. supposing the excess of happiness over 
health to be greater than that of health over what produces 
health, then what produces happiness is better than health. For 
what produces happiness exceeds what produces health just as 
much as happiness exceeds health. But health exceeds what 
produces health by a smaller amount; ergo, the excess of what 
produces happiness over what produces health is greater than 
that of health over what produces health. Clearly, therefore, 
what produces happiness is more desirable than health: for it 
exceeds the same standard by a greater amount. Moreover, 
what is in itself nobler and more precious and praiseworthy is 
more desirable than what is less so, e.g. friendship than wealth, 
and justice than strength. For the former belong in themselves 
to the class of things precious and praiseworthy, while the latter 
do so not in themselves but for something else: for no one 
prizes wealth for itself but always for something else, whereas 
we prize friendship for itself, even though nothing else is likely 
to come to us from it. 

Moreover, whenever two things are very much like one another, 
and we cannot see any superiority in the one over the other of 
them, we should look at them from the standpoint of their 
consequences. For the one which is followed by the greater good 
is the more desirable: or, if the consequences be evil, that is 
more desirable which is followed by the less evil. For though 
both may be desirable, yet there may possibly be some 
unpleasant consequence involved to turn the scale. Our survey 
from the point of view of consequences lies in two directions, 
for there are prior consequences and later consequences: e.g. if 
a man learns, it follows that he was ignorant before and knows 


afterwards. As a rule, the later consequence is the better to 
consider. You should take, therefore, whichever of the 
consequences suits your purpose. 

Moreover, a greater number of good things is more desirable 
than a smaller, either absolutely or when the one is included in 
the other, viz. the smaller number in the greater. An objection 
may be raised suppose in some particular case the one is valued 
for the sake of the other; for then the two together are not more 
desirable than the one; e.g. recovery of health and health, than 
health alone, inasmuch as we desire recovery of health for the 
sake of health. Also it is quite possible for what is not good, 
together with what is, to be more desirable than a greater 
number of good things, e.g. the combination of happiness and 
something else which is not good may be more desirable than 
the combination of justice and courage. Also, the same things 
are more valuable if accompanied than if unaccompanied by 
pleasure, and likewise when free from pain than when attended 
with pain. 

Also, everything is more desirable at the season when it is of 
greater consequence; e.g. freedom from pain in old age more 
than in youth: for it is of greater consequence in old age. On the 
same principle also, prudence is more desirable in old age; for 
no man chooses the young to guide him, because he does not 
expect them to be prudent. With courage, the converse is the 
case, for it is in youth that the active exercise of courage is more 
imperatively required. Likewise also with temperance; for the 
young are more troubled by their passions than are their elders. 

Also, that is more desirable which is more useful at every 
season or at most seasons, e.g. justice and temperance rather 
than courage: for they are always useful, while courage is only 
useful at times. Also, that one of two things which if all possess, 
we do not need the other thing, is more desirable than that 


which all may possess and still we want the other one as well. 
Take the case of justice and courage; if everybody were just, 
there would be no use for courage, whereas all might be 
courageous, and still justice would be of use. 

Moreover, judge by the destructions and losses and generations 
and acquisitions and contraries of things: for things whose 
destruction is more objectionable are themselves more 
desirable. Likewise also with the losses and contraries of things; 
for a thing whose loss or whose contrary is more objectionable 
is itself more desirable. With the generations or acquisitions of 
things the opposite is the case: for things whose acquisition or 
generation is more desirable are themselves also desirable. 
Another commonplace rule is that what is nearer to the good is 
better and more desirable, i.e. what more nearly resembles the 
good: thus justice is better than a just man. Also, that which is 
more like than another thing to something better than itself, as 

e.g. some say that Ajax was a better man than Odysseus 
because he was more like Achilles. An objection may be raised 
to this that it is not true: for it is quite possible that Ajax did not 
resemble Achilles more nearly than Odysseus in the points 
which made Achilles the best of them, and that Odysseus was a 
good man, though unlike Achilles. Look also to see whether the 
resemblance be that of a caricature, like the resemblance of a 
monkey to a man, whereas a horse bears none: for the monkey 
is not the more handsome creature, despite its nearer 
resemblance to a man. Again, in the case of two things, if one is 
more like the better thing while another is more like the worse, 
then that is likely to be better which is more like the better. This 
too, however, admits of an objection: for quite possibly the one 
only slightly resembles the better, while the other strongly 
resembles the worse, e.g. supposing the resemblance of Ajax to 
Achilles to be slight, while that of Odysseus to Nestor is strong. 
Also it may be that the one which is like the better type shows a 
degrading likeness, whereas the one which is like the worse 

type improves upon it: witness the likeness of a horse to a 
donkey, and that of a monkey to a man. 

Another rule is that the more conspicuous good is more 
desirable than the less conspicuous, and the more difficult than 
the easier: for we appreciate better the possession of things that 
cannot be easily acquired. Also the more personal possession is 
more desirable than the more widely shared. Also, that which is 
more free from connexion with evil: for what is not attended by 
any unpleasantness is more desirable than what is so attended. 

Moreover, if A be without qualification better than B, then also 
the best of the members of A is better than the best of the 
members of B; e.g. if Man be better than Horse, then also the 
best man is better than the best horse. Also, if the best in A be 
better than the best in B, then also A is better than B without 
qualification; e.g. if the best man be better than the best horse, 
then also Man is better than Horse without qualification. 

Moreover, things which our friends can share are more desirable 
than those they cannot. Also, things which we like rather to do 
to our friend are more desirable than those we like to do to the 
man in the street, e.g. just dealing and the doing of good rather 
than the semblance of them: for we would rather really do good 
to our friends than seem to do so, whereas towards the man in 
the street the converse is the case. 

Also, superfluities are better than necessities, and are 
sometimes more desirable as well: for the good life is better 
than mere life, and good life is a superfluity, whereas mere life 
itself is a necessity. Sometimes, though, what is better is not 
also more desirable: for there is no necessity that because it is 
better it should also be more desirable: at least to be a 
philosopher is better than to make money, but it is not more 
desirable for a man who lacks the necessities of life. The 
expression ‘superfluity’ applies whenever a man possesses the 


necessities of life and sets to work to secure as well other noble 
acquisitions. Roughly speaking, perhaps, necessities are more 
desirable, while superfluities are better. 

Also, what cannot be got from another is more desirable than 
what can be got from another as well, as (e.g.) is the case of 
justice compared with courage. Also, A is more desirable if A is 
desirable without B, but not B without A: power (e.g.) is not 
desirable without prudence, but prudence is desirable without 
power. Also, if of two things we repudiate the one in order to be 
thought to possess the other, then that one is more desirable 
which we wish to be thought to possess; thus (e.g.) we repudiate 
the love of hard work in order that people may think us 
geniuses. 

Moreover, that is more desirable in whose absence it is less 
blameworthy for people to be vexed; and that is more desirable 
in whose absence it is more blameworthy for a man not to be 
vexed. 

Moreover, of things that belong to the same species one which 
possesses the peculiar virtue of the species is more desirable 
than one which does not. If both possess it, then the one which 
possesses it in a greater degree is more desirable. 

Moreover, if one thing makes good whatever it touches, while 
another does not, the former is more desirable, just as also what 
makes things warm is warmer than what does not. If both do 
so, then that one is more desirable which does so in a greater 
degree, or if it render good the better and more important object 

– if (e.g.), the one makes good the soul, and the other the body. 

Moreover, judge things by their inflexions and uses and actions 
and works, and judge these by them: for they go with each 
other: e.g. if ‘justly’ means something more desirable than 
‘courageously’, then also justice means something more 
desirable than courage; and if justice be more desirable than 
courage, then also ‘justly’ means something more desirable 
than ‘courageously’. Similarly also in the other cases. 

Moreover, if one thing exceeds while the other falls short of the 
same standard of good, the one which exceeds is the more 
desirable; or if the one exceeds an even higher standard. Nay 
more, if there be two things both preferable to something, the 
one which is more highly preferable to it is more desirable than 
the less highly preferable. Moreover, when the excess of a thing 
is more desirable than the excess of something else, that thing 
is itself also more desirable than the other, as (e.g.) friendship 
than money: for an excess of friendship is more desirable than 
an excess of money. So also that of which a man would rather 
that it were his by his own doing is more desirable than what he 
would rather get by another’s doing, e.g. friends than money. 
Moreover, judge by means of an addition, and see if the addition 
of A to the same thing as B makes the whole more desirable 
than does the addition of B. You must, however, beware of 
adducing a case in which the common term uses, or in some 
other way helps the case of, one of the things added to it, but 
not the other, as (e.g.) if you took a saw and a sickle in 
combination with the art of carpentry: for in the combination 
the saw is a more desirable thing, but it is not a more desirable 
thing without qualification. Again, a thing is more desirable if, 
when added to a lesser good, it makes the whole greater good. 
Likewise, also, you should judge by means of subtraction: for 
the thing upon whose subtraction the remainder is a lesser 
good may be taken to be a greater good, whichever it be whose 
subtraction makes the remainder a lesser good. 


Also, if one thing be desirable for itself, and the other for the 
look of it, the former is more desirable, as (e.g.) health than 
beauty. A thing is defined as being desired for the look of it if, 
supposing no one knew of it, you would not care to have it. Also, 
it is more desirable both for itself and for the look of it, while 
the other thing is desirable on the one ground alone. Also, 
whichever is the more precious for itself, is also better and more 
desirable. A thing may be taken to be more precious in itself 
which we choose rather for itself, without anything else being 
likely to come of it. 

Moreover, you should distinguish in how many senses 
‘desirable’ is used, and with a view to what ends, e.g. 
expediency or honour or pleasure. For what is useful for all or 
most of them may be taken to be more desirable than what is 
not useful in like manner. If the same characters belong to both 
things you should look and see which possesses them more 
markedly, i.e. which of the two is the more pleasant or more 
honourable or more expedient. Again, that is more desirable 
which serves the better purpose, e.g. that which serves to 
promote virtue more than that which serves to promote 
pleasure. Likewise also in the case of objectionable things; for 
that is more objectionable which stands more in the way of 
what is desirable, e.g. disease more than ugliness: for disease is 
a greater hindrance both to pleasure and to being good. 

Moreover, argue by showing that the thing in question is in like 
measure objectionable and desirable: for a thing of such a 
character that a man might well desire and object to it alike is 
less desirable than the other which is desirable only. 


Comparisons of things together should therefore be conducted 
in the manner prescribed. The same commonplace rules are 
useful also for showing that anything is simply desirable or 
objectionable: for we have only to subtract the excess of one 
thing over another. For if what is more precious be more 
desirable, then also what is precious is desirable; and if what is 
more useful be more desirable, then also what is useful is 
desirable. Likewise, also, in the case of other things which admit 
of comparisons of that kind. For in some cases in the very 
course of comparing the things together we at once assert also 
that each of them, or the one of them, is desirable, e.g. 
whenever we call the one good ‘by nature’ and the other ‘not by 
nature’: for dearly what is good by nature is desirable. 

The commonplace rules relating to comparative degrees and 
amounts ought to be taken in the most general possible form: 
for when so taken they are likely to be useful in a larger number 
of instances. It is possible to render some of the actual rules 
given above more universal by a slight alteration of the 
expression, e.g. that what by nature exhibits such and such a 
quality exhibits that quality in a greater degree than what 
exhibits it not by nature. Also, if one thing does, and another 
does not, impart such and such a quality to that which 
possesses it, or to which it belongs, then whichever does impart 
it is of that quality in greater degree than the one which does 
not impart it; and if both impart it, then that one exhibits it in a 
greater degree which imparts it in a greater degree. 


Moreover, if in any character one thing exceeds and another 
falls short of the same standard; also, if the one exceeds 
something which exceeds a given standard, while the other 
does not reach that standard, then clearly the first-named thing 
exhibits that character in a greater degree. Moreover, you should 
judge by means of addition, and see if A when added to the 
same thing as B imparts to the whole such and such a character 
in a more marked degree than B, or if, when added to a thing 
which exhibits that character in a less degree, it imparts that 
character to the whole in a greater degree. Likewise, also, you 
may judge by means of subtraction: for a thing upon whose 
subtraction the remainder exhibits such and such a character in 
a less degree, itself exhibits that character in a greater degree. 
Also, things exhibit such and such a character in a greater 
degree if more free from admixture with their contraries; e.g. 
that is whiter which is more free from admixture with black. 
Moreover, apart from the rules given above, that has such and 
such a character in greater degree which admits in a greater 
degree of the definition proper to the given character; e.g. if the 
definition of ‘white’ be ‘a colour which pierces the vision’, then 
that is whiter which is in a greater degree a colour that pierces 
the vision. 

If the question be put in a particular and not in a universal 
form, in the first place the universal constructive or destructive 
commonplace rules that have been given may all be brought 
into use. For in demolishing or establishing a thing universally 
we also show it in particular: for if it be true of all, it is true also 
of some, and if untrue of all, it is untrue of some. Especially 
handy and of general application are the commonplace rules 


that are drawn from the opposites and co-ordinates and 
inflexions of a thing: for public opinion grants alike the claim 
that if all pleasure be good, then also all pain is evil, and the 
claim that if some pleasure be good, then also some pain is evil. 
Moreover, if some form of sensation be not a capacity, then also 
some form of failure of sensation is not a failure of capacity. 
Also, if the object of conception is in some cases an object of 
knowledge, then also some form of conceiving is knowledge. 
Again, if what is unjust be in some cases good, then also what is 
just is in some cases evil; and if what happens justly is in some 
cases evil, then also what happens unjustly is in some cases 
good. Also, if what is pleasant is in some cases objectionable, 
then pleasure is in some cases an objectionable thing. On the 
same principle, also, if what is pleasant is in some cases 
beneficial, then pleasure is in some cases a beneficial thing. The 
case is the same also as regards the things that destroy, and the 
processes of generation and destruction. For if anything that 
destroys pleasure or knowledge be in some cases good, then we 
may take it that pleasure or knowledge is in some cases an evil 
thing. Likewise, also, if the destruction of knowledge be in some 
cases a good thing or its production an evil thing, then 
knowledge will be in some cases an evil thing; e.g. if for a man 
to forget his disgraceful conduct be a good thing, and to 
remember it be an evil thing, then the knowledge of his 
disgraceful conduct may be taken to be an evil thing. The same 
holds also in other cases: in all such cases the premiss and the 
conclusion are equally likely to be accepted. 

Moreover you should judge by means of greater or smaller or 
like degrees: for if some member of another genus exhibit such 
and such a character in a more marked degree than your object, 
while no member of that genus exhibits that character at all, 
then you may take it that neither does the object in question 
exhibit it; e.g. if some form of knowledge be good in a greater 
degree than pleasure, while no form of knowledge is good, then 


you may take it that pleasure is not good either. Also, you 
should judge by a smaller or like degree in the same way: for so 
you will find it possible both to demolish and to establish a 
view, except that whereas both are possible by means of like 
degrees, by means of a smaller degree it is possible only to 
establish, not to overthrow. For if a certain form of capacity be 
good in a like degree to knowledge, and a certain form of 
capacity be good, then so also is knowledge; while if no form of 
capacity be good, then neither is knowledge. If, too, a certain 
form of capacity be good in a less degree than knowledge, and a 
certain form of capacity be good, then so also is knowledge; but 
if no form of capacity be good, there is no necessity that no 
form of knowledge either should be good. Clearly, then, it is only 
possible to establish a view by means of a less degree. 

Not only by means of another genus can you overthrow a view, 
but also by means of the same, if you take the most marked 
instance of the character in question; e.g. if it be maintained 
that some form of knowledge is good, then, suppose it to be 
shown that prudence is not good, neither will any other kind be 
good, seeing that not even the kind upon which there is most 
general agreement is so. Moreover, you should go to work by 
means of an hypothesis; you should claim that the attribute, if it 
belongs or does not belong in one case, does so in a like degree 
in all, e.g. that if the soul of man be immortal, so are other souls 
as well, while if this one be not so, neither are the others. If, 
then, it be maintained that in some instance the attribute 
belongs, you must show that in some instance it does not 
belong: for then it will follow, by reason of the hypothesis, that 
it does not belong to any instance at all. If, on the other hand, it 
be maintained that it does not belong in some instance, you 
must show that it does belong in some instance, for in this way 
it will follow that it belongs to all instances. It is clear that the 
maker of the hypothesis universalizes the question, whereas it 
was stated in a particular form: for he claims that the maker of 


a particular admission should make a universal admission, 
inasmuch as he claims that if the attribute belongs in one 
instance, it belongs also in all instances alike. 

If the problem be indefinite, it is possible to overthrow a 
statement in only one way; e.g. if a man has asserted that 
pleasure is good or is not good, without any further definition. 
For if he meant that a particular pleasure is good, you must 
show universally that no pleasure is good, if the proposition in 
question is to be demolished. And likewise, also, if he meant 
that some particular pleasure is not good you must show 
universally that all pleasure is good: it is impossible to demolish 
it in any other way. For if we show that some particular pleasure 
is not good or is good, the proposition in question is not yet 
demolished. It is clear, then, that it is possible to demolish an 
indefinite statement in one way only, whereas it can be 
established in two ways: for whether we show universally that 
all pleasure is good, or whether we show that a particular 
pleasure is good, the proposition in question will have been 
proved. Likewise, also, supposing we are required to argue that 
some particular pleasure is not good, if we show that no 
pleasure is good or that a particular pleasure is not good, we 
shall have produced an argument in both ways, both universally 
and in particular, to show that some particular pleasure is not 
good. If, on the other hand, the statement made be definite, it 
will be possible to demolish it in two ways; e.g. if it be 
maintained that it is an attribute of some particular pleasure to 
be good, while of some it is not: for whether it be shown that all 
pleasure, or that no pleasure, is good, the proposition in 
question will have been demolished. If, however, he has stated 
that only one single pleasure is good, it is possible to demolish 
it in three ways: for by showing that all pleasure, or that no 
pleasure, or that more than one pleasure, is good, we shall have 
demolished the statement in question. If the statement be 
made still more definite, e.g. that prudence alone of the virtues 


is knowledge, there are four ways of demolishing it: for if it be 
shown that all virtue is knowledge, or that no virtue is so, or 
that some other virtue (e.g. justice) is so, or that prudence itself 
is not knowledge, the proposition in question will have been 
demolished. 

It is useful also to take a look at individual instances, in cases 
where some attribute has been said to belong or not to belong, 
as in the case of universal questions. Moreover, you should take 
a glance among genera, dividing them by their species until you 
come to those that are not further divisible, as has been said 
before:’ for whether the attribute is found to belong in all cases 
or in none, you should, after adducing several instances, claim 
that he should either admit your point universally, or else bring 
an objection showing in what case it does not hold. Moreover, in 
cases where it is possible to make the accident definite either 
specifically or numerically, you should look and see whether 
perhaps none of them belongs, showing e.g. that time is not 
moved, nor yet a movement, by enumerating how many species 
there are of movement: for if none of these belong to time, 
clearly it does not move, nor yet is a movement. Likewise, also, 
you can show that the soul is not a number, by dividing all 
numbers into either odd or even: for then, if the soul be neither 
odd nor even, clearly it is not a number. 

In regard then to Accident, you should set to work by means like 
these, and in this manner. 

Book IV 



Next we must go on to examine questions relating to Genus and 
Property. These are elements in the questions that relate to 
definitions, but dialecticians seldom address their inquiries to 
these by themselves. If, then, a genus be suggested for 
something that is, first take a look at all objects which belong to 
the same genus as the thing mentioned, and see whether the 
genus suggested is not predicated of one of them, as happens in 
the case of an accident: e.g. if ‘good’ be laid down to be the 
genus of ‘pleasure’, see whether some particular pleasure be not 
good: for, if so, clearly good’ is not the genus of pleasure: for the 
genus is predicated of all the members of the same species. 
Secondly, see whether it be predicated not in the category of 
essence, but as an accident, as ‘white’ is predicated of ‘snow’, or 
‘self-moved’ of the soul. For ‘snow’ is not a kind of ‘white’, and 
therefore ‘white’ is not the genus of snow, nor is the soul a kind 
of ‘moving object’: its motion is an accident of it, as it often is of 
an animal to walk or to be walking. Moreover, ‘moving’ does not 
seem to indicate the essence, but rather a state of doing or of 
having something done to it. Likewise, also, ‘white’: for it 
indicates not the essence of snow, but a certain quality of it. So 
that neither of them is predicated in the category of ‘essence’. 

Especially you should take a look at the definition of Accident, 
and see whether it fits the genus mentioned, as (e.g.) is also the 
case in the instances just given. For it is possible for a thing to 
be and not to be self-moved, and likewise, also, for it to be and 
not to be white. So that neither of these attributes is the genus 
but an accident, since we were saying that an accident is an 
attribute which can belong to a thing and also not belong. 

Moreover, see whether the genus and the species be not found 
in the same division, but the one be a substance while the other 


is a quality, or the one be a relative while the other is a quality, 
as (e.g.) ‘slow’ and ‘swan’ are each a substance, while ‘white’ is 
not a substance but a quality, so that ‘white’ is not the genus 
either of ‘snow’ or of ‘swan’. Again, knowledge’ is a relative, 
while ‘good’ and ‘noble’ are each a quality, so that good, or 
noble, is not the genus of knowledge. For the genera of relatives 
ought themselves also to be relatives, as is the case with 
‘double’: for multiple’, which is the genus of ‘double’, is itself 
also a relative. To speak generally, the genus ought to fall under 
the same division as the species: for if the species be a 
substance, so too should be the genus, and if the species be a 
quality, so too the genus should be a quality; e.g. if white be a 
quality, so too should colour be. Likewise, also, in other cases. 

Again, see whether it be necessary or possible for the genus to 
partake of the object which has been placed in the genus. ‘To 
partake’ is defined as ‘to admit the definition of that which is 
partaken. Clearly, therefore, the species partake of the genera, 
but not the genera of the species: for the species admits the 
definition of the genus, whereas the genus does not admit that 
of the species. You must look, therefore, and see whether the 
genus rendered partakes or can possibly partake of the species, 

e.g. if any one were to render anything as genus of ‘being’ or of 
‘unity’: for then the result will be that the genus partakes of the 
species: for of everything that is, ‘being’ and ‘unity’ are 
predicated, and therefore their definition as well. 
Moreover, see if there be anything of which the species rendered 
is true, while the genus is not so, e.g. supposing ‘being’ or ‘object 
of knowledge’ were stated to be the genus of ‘object of opinion’. 
For ‘object of opinion’ will be a predicate of what does not exist; 
for many things which do not exist are objects of opinion; 
whereas that ‘being’ or ‘object of knowledge’ is not predicated 
of what does not exist is clear. So that neither ‘being’ nor ‘object 
of knowledge’ is the genus of ‘object of opinion’: for of the 


objects of which the species is predicated, the genus ought to be 
predicated as well. 

Again, see whether the object placed in the genus be quite 
unable to partake of any of its species: for it is impossible that it 
should partake of the genus if it do not partake of any of its 
species, except it be one of the species reached by the first 
division: these do partake of the genus alone. If, therefore, 
‘Motion’ be stated as the genus of pleasure, you should look and 
see if pleasure be neither locomotion nor alteration, nor any of 
the rest of the given modes of motion: for clearly you may then 
take it that it does not partake of any of the species, and 
therefore not of the genus either, since what partakes of the 
genus must necessarily partake of one of the species as well: so 
that pleasure could not be a species of Motion, nor yet be one of 
the individual phenomena comprised under the term ‘motion’. 
For individuals as well partake in the genus and the species, as 
(e.g.) an individual man partakes of both ‘man’ and ‘animal’. 

Moreover, see if the term placed in the genus has a wider 
denotation than the genus, as (e.g.) ‘object of opinion’ has, as 
compared with ‘being’: for both what is and what is not are 
objects of opinion, so that ‘object of opinion’ could not be a 
species of being: for the genus is always of wider denotation 
than the species. Again, see if the species and its genus have an 
equal denotation; suppose, for instance, that of the attributes 
which go with everything, one were to be stated as a species 
and the other as its genus, as for example Being and Unity: for 
everything has being and unity, so that neither is the genus of 
the other, since their denotation is equal. Likewise, also, if the 
‘first’ of a series and the ‘beginning’ were to be placed one 
under the other: for the beginning is first and the first is the 
beginning, so that either both expressions are identical or at 
any rate neither is the genus of the other. The elementary 
principle in regard to all such cases is that the genus has a 


wider denotation than the species and its differentia: for the 
differentia as well has a narrower denotation than the genus. 

See also whether the genus mentioned fails, or might be 
generally thought to fail, to apply to some object which is not 
specifically different from the thing in question; or, if your 
argument be constructive, whether it does so apply. For all 
things that are not specifically different have the same genus. If, 
therefore, it be shown to apply to one, then clearly it applies to 
all, and if it fails to apply to one, clearly it fails to apply to any; 

e.g. if any one who assumes ‘indivisible lines’ were to say that 
the ‘indivisible’ is their genus. For the aforesaid term is not the 
genus of divisible lines, and these do not differ as regards their 
species from indivisible: for straight lines are never different 
from each other as regards their species. 
Look and see, also, if there be any other genus of the given 
species which neither embraces the genus rendered nor yet 
falls under it, e.g. suppose any one were to lay down that 
‘knowledge’ is the genus of justice. For virtue is its genus as 
well, and neither of these genera embraces the remaining one, 
so that knowledge could not be the genus of justice: for it is 
generally accepted that whenever one species falls under two 
genera, the one is embraced by the other. Yet a principle of this 
kind gives rise to a difficulty in some cases. For some people 
hold that prudence is both virtue and knowledge, and that 
neither of its genera is embraced by the other: although 
certainly not everybody admits that prudence is knowledge. If, 
however, any one were to admit the truth of this assertion, yet it 
would still be generally agreed to be necessary that the genera 


of the same object must at any rate be subordinate either the 
one to the other or both to the same, as actually is the case with 
virtue and knowledge. For both fall under the same genus; for 
each of them is a state and a disposition. You should look, 
therefore, and see whether neither of these things is true of the 
genus rendered; for if the genera be subordinate neither the one 
to the other nor both to the same, then what is rendered could 
not be the true genus. 

Look, also, at the genus of the genus rendered, and so 
continually at the next higher genus, and see whether all are 
predicated of the species, and predicated in the category of 
essence: for all the higher genera should be predicated of the 
species in the category of essence. If, then, there be anywhere a 
discrepancy, clearly what is rendered is not the true genus. 
[Again, see whether either the genus itself, or one of its higher 
genera, partakes of the species: for the higher genus does not 
partake of any of the lower.] If, then, you are overthrowing a 
view, follow the rule as given: if establishing one, then – suppose 
that what has been named as genus be admitted to belong to 
the species, only it be disputed whether it belongs as genus – it 
is enough to show that one of its higher genera is predicated of 
the species in the category of essence. For if one of them be 
predicated in the category of essence, all of them, both higher 
and lower than this one, if predicated at all of the species, will 
be predicated of it in the category of essence: so that what has 
been rendered as genus is also predicated in the category of 
essence. The premiss that when one genus is predicated in the 
category of essence, all the rest, if predicated at all, will be 
predicated in the category of essence, should be secured by 
induction. Supposing, however, that it be disputed whether 
what has been rendered as genus belongs at all, it is not enough 
to show that one of the higher genera is predicated of the 
species in the category of essence: e.g. if any one has rendered 
‘locomotion’ as the genus of walking, it is not enough to show 


that walking is ‘motion’ in order to show that it is ‘locomotion’, 
seeing that there are other forms of motion as well; but one 
must show in addition that walking does not partake of any of 
the species of motion produced by the same division except 
locomotion. For of necessity what partakes of the genus 
partakes also of one of the species produced by the first division 
of the genus. If, therefore, walking does not partake either of 
increase or decrease or of the other kinds of motion, clearly it 
would partake of locomotion, so that locomotion would be the 
genus of walking. 

Again, look among the things of which the given species is 
predicated as genus, and see if what is rendered as its genus be 
also predicated in the category of essence of the very things of 
which the species is so predicated, and likewise if all the genera 
higher than this genus are so predicated as well. For if there be 
anywhere a discrepancy, clearly what has been rendered is not 
the true genus: for had it been the genus, then both the genera 
higher than it, and it itself, would all have been predicated in 
the category of essence of those objects of which the species too 
is predicated in the category of essence. If, then, you are 
overthrowing a view, it is useful to see whether the genus fails 
to be predicated in the category of essence of those things of 
which the species too is predicated. If establishing a view, it is 
useful to see whether it is predicated in the category of essence: 
for if so, the result will be that the genus and the species will be 
predicated of the same object in the category of essence, so that 
the same object falls under two genera: the genera must 
therefore of necessity be subordinate one to the other, and 
therefore if it be shown that the one we wish to establish as 
genus is not subordinate to the species, clearly the species 
would be subordinate to it, so that you may take it as shown 
that it is the genus. 


Look, also, at the definitions of the genera, and see whether 
they apply both to the given species and to the objects which 
partake of the species. For of necessity the definitions of its 
genera must be predicated of the species and of the objects 
which partake of the species: if, then, there be anywhere a 
discrepancy, clearly what has been rendered is not the genus. 

Again, see if he has rendered the differentia as the genus, e.g. 
‘immortal’ as the genus of ‘God’. For ‘immortal’ is a differentia 
of ‘living being’, seeing that of living beings some are mortal 
and others immortal. Clearly, then, a bad mistake has been 
made; for the differentia of a thing is never its genus. And that 
this is true is clear: for a thing’s differentia never signifies its 
essence, but rather some quality, as do ‘walking’ and ‘biped’. 

Also, see whether he has placed the differentia inside the 
genus, e.g. by taking ‘odd’ as a number’. For ‘odd’ is a differentia 
of number, not a species. Nor is the differentia generally 
thought to partake of the genus: for what partakes of the genus 
is always either a species or an individual, whereas the 
differentia is neither a species nor an individual. Clearly, 
therefore, the differentia does not partake of the genus, so that 
‘odd’ too is no species but a differentia, seeing that it does not 
partake of the genus. 

Moreover, see whether he has placed the genus inside the 
species, e.g. by taking ‘contact’ to be a ‘juncture’, or ‘mixture’ a 
‘fusion’, or, as in Plato’s definition,’ ‘locomotion’ to be the same 
as ‘carriage’. For there is no necessity that contact should be 
juncture: rather, conversely, juncture must be contact: for what 
is in contact is not always joined, though what is joined is 
always in contact. Likewise, also, in the remaining instances: for 
mixture is not always a ‘fusion’ (for to mix dry things does not 
fuse them), nor is locomotion always ‘carriage’. For walking is 
not generally thought to be carriage: for ‘carriage’ is mostly used 


of things that change one place for another involuntarily, as 
happens in the case of inanimate things. Clearly, also, the 
species, in the instances given, has a wider denotation than the 
genus, whereas it ought to be vice versa. Again, see whether he 
has placed the differentia inside the species, by taking (e.g.) 
‘immortal’ to be ‘a god’. For the result will be that the species 
has an equal or wider denotation: and this cannot be, for always 
the differentia has an equal or a wider denotation than the 
species. Moreover, see whether he has placed the genus inside 
the differentia, by making ‘colour’ (e.g.) to be a thing that 
‘pierces’, or ‘number’ a thing that is ‘odd’. Also, see if he has 
mentioned the genus as differentia: for it is possible for a man 
to bring forward a statement of this kind as well, e.g. that 
‘mixture’ is the differentia of ‘fusion’, or that change of place’ is 
the differentia of ‘carriage’. All such cases should be examined 
by means of the same principles: for they depend upon 
common rules: for the genus should have a wider denotation 
that its differentia, and also should not partake of its 
differentia; whereas, if it be rendered in this manner, neither of 
the aforesaid requirements can be satisfied: for the genus will 
both have a narrower denotation than its differentia, and will 
partake of it. 

Again, if no differentia belonging to the genus be predicated of 
the given species, neither will the genus be predicated of it; e.g. 
of ‘soul’ neither ‘odd’ nor ‘even’ is predicated: neither therefore 
is ‘number’. Moreover, see whether the species is naturally prior 
and abolishes the genus along with itself: for the contrary is the 
general view. Moreover, if it be possible for the genus stated, or 
for its differentia, to be absent from the alleged species, e.g. for 
‘movement’ to be absent from the ‘soul’, or ‘truth and falsehood’ 
from ‘opinion’, then neither of the terms stated could be its 
genus or its differentia: for the general view is that the genus 
and the differentia accompany the species, as long as it exists. 


Look and see, also, if what is placed in the genus partakes or 
could possibly partake of any contrary of the genus: for in that 
case the same thing will at the same time partake of contrary 
things, seeing that the genus is never absent from it, while it 
partakes, or can possibly partake, of the contrary genus as well. 
Moreover, see whether the species shares in any character 
which it is utterly impossible for any member of the genus to 
have. Thus (e.g.) if the soul has a share in life, while it is 
impossible for any number to live, then the soul could not be a 
species of number. 

You should look and see, also, if the species be a homonym of 
the genus, and employ as your elementary principles those 
already stated for dealing with homonymity: for the genus and 
the species are synonymous. 

Seeing that of every genus there is more than one species, look 
and see if it be impossible that there should be another species 
than the given one belonging to the genus stated: for if there 
should be none, then clearly what has been stated could not be 
a genus at all. 

Look and see, also, if he has rendered as genus a metaphorical 
expression, describing (e.g. ‘temperance’ as a ‘harmony’: a 
‘harmony’: for a genus is always predicated of its species in its 
literal sense, whereas ‘harmony’ is predicated of temperance 
not in a literal sense but metaphorically: for a harmony always 
consists in notes. 

Moreover, if there be any contrary of the species, examine it. 
The examination may take different forms; first of all see if the 


contrary as well be found in the same genus as the species, 
supposing the genus to have no contrary; for contraries ought to 
be found in the same genus, if there be no contrary to the 
genus. Supposing, on the other hand, that there is a contrary to 
the genus, see if the contrary of the species be found in the 
contrary genus: for of necessity the contrary species must be in 
the contrary genus, if there be any contrary to the genus. Each 
of these points is made plain by means of induction. Again, see 
whether the contrary of the species be not found in any genus 
at all, but be itself a genus, e.g. ‘good’: for if this be not found in 
any genus, neither will its contrary be found in any genus, but 
will itself be a genus, as happens in the case of ‘good’ and ‘evil’: 
for neither of these is found in a genus, but each of them is a 
genus. Moreover, see if both genus and species be contrary to 
something, and one pair of contraries have an intermediary, but 
not the other. For if the genera have an intermediary, so should 
their species as well, and if the species have, so should their 
genera as well, as is the case with (1) virtue and vice and (2) 
justice and injustice: for each pair has an intermediary. An 
objection to this is that there is no intermediary between health 
and disease, although there is one between evil and good. Or 
see whether, though there be indeed an intermediary between 
both pairs, i.e. both between the species and between the 
genera, yet it be not similarly related, but in one case be a mere 
negation of the extremes, whereas in the other case it is a 
subject. For the general view is that the relation should be 
similar in both cases, as it is in the cases of virtue and vice and 
of justice and injustice: for the intermediaries between both are 
mere negations. Moreover, whenever the genus has no contrary, 
look and see not merely whether the contrary of the species be 
found in the same genus, but the intermediate as well: for the 
genus containing the extremes contains the intermediates as 
well, as (e.g.) in the case of white and black: for ‘colour’ is the 
genus both of these and of all the intermediate colours as well. 


An objection may be raised that ‘defect’ and ‘excess’ are found 
in the same genus (for both are in the genus ‘evil’), whereas 
moderate amount’, the intermediate between them, is found 
not in ‘evil’ but in ‘good’. Look and see also whether, while the 
genus has a contrary, the species has none; for if the genus be 
contrary to anything, so too is the species, as virtue to vice and 
justice to injustice. 

Likewise. also, if one were to look at other instances, one would 
come to see clearly a fact like this. An objection may be raised 
in the case of health and disease: for health in general is the 
contrary of disease, whereas a particular disease, being a 
species of disease, e.g. fever and ophthalmia and any other 
particular disease, has no contrary. 

If, therefore, you are demolishing a view, there are all these 
ways in which you should make your examination: for if the 
aforesaid characters do not belong to it, clearly what has been 
rendered is not the genus. If, on the other hand, you are 
establishing a view, there are three ways: in the first place, see 
whether the contrary of the species be found in the genus 
stated, suppose the genus have no contrary: for if the contrary 
be found in it, clearly the species in question is found in it as 
well. Moreover, see if the intermediate species is found in the 
genus stated: for whatever genus contains the intermediate 
contains the extremes as well. Again, if the genus have a 
contrary, look and see whether also the contrary species is 
found in the contrary genus: for if so, clearly also the species in 
question is found in the genus in question. 

Again, consider in the case of the inflexions and the coordinates 
of species and genus, and see whether they follow 
likewise, both in demolishing and in establishing a view. For 
whatever attribute belongs or does not belong to one belongs or 
does not belong at the same time to all; e.g. if justice be a 


particular form of knowledge, then also ‘justly’ is ‘knowingly’ 
and the just man is a man of knowledge: whereas if any of 
these things be not so, then neither is any of the rest of them. 

Again, consider the case of things that bear a like relation to 
one another. Thus (e.g.) the relation of the pleasant to pleasure 
is like that of the useful to the good: for in each case the one 
produces the other. If therefore pleasure be a kind of ‘good’, 
then also the pleasant will be a kind of ‘useful’: for clearly it 
may be taken to be productive of good, seeing that pleasure is 
good. In the same way also consider the case of processes of 
generation and destruction; if (e.g.) to build be to be active, then 
to have built is to have been active, and if to learn be to 
recollect, then also to have learnt is to have recollected, and if to 
be decomposed be to be destroyed, then to have been 
decomposed is to have been destroyed, and decomposition is a 
kind of destruction. Consider also in the same way the case of 
things that generate or destroy, and of the capacities and uses 
of things; and in general, both in demolishing and in 
establishing an argument, you should examine things in the 
light of any resemblance of whatever description, as we were 
saying in the case of generation and destruction. For if what 
tends to destroy tends to decompose, then also to be destroyed 
is to be decomposed: and if what tends to generate tends to 
produce, then to be generated is to be produced, and generation 
is production. Likewise, also, in the case of the capacities and 
uses of things: for if a capacity be a disposition, then also to be 
capable of something is to be disposed to it, and if the use of 
anything be an activity, then to use it is to be active, and to have 
used it is to have been active. 


If the opposite of the species be a privation, there are two ways 
of demolishing an argument, first of all by looking to see if the 
opposite be found in the genus rendered: for either the 
privation is to be found absolutely nowhere in the same genus, 
or at least not in the same ultimate genus: e.g. if the ultimate 
genus containing sight be sensation, then blindness will not be 
a sensation. Secondly, if there be a sensation. Secondly, if there 
be a privation opposed to both genus and species, but the 
opposite of the species be not found in the opposite of the 
genus, then neither could the species rendered be in the genus 
rendered. If, then, you are demolishing a view, you should follow 
the rule as stated; but if establishing one there is but one way: 
for if the opposite species be found in the opposite genus, then 
also the species in question would be found in the genus in 
question: e.g. if ‘blindness’ be a form of ‘insensibility’, then 
‘sight’ is a form of ‘sensation’. 

Again, look at the negations of the genus and species and 
convert the order of terms, according to the method described 
in the case of Accident: e.g. if the pleasant be a kind of good, 
what is not good is not pleasant. For were this no something not 
good as well would then be pleasant. That, however, cannot be, 
for it is impossible, if ‘good’ be the genus of pleasant, that 
anything not good should be pleasant: for of things of which the 
genus is not predicated, none of the species is predicated either. 
Also, in establishing a view, you should adopt the same method 
of examination: for if what is not good be not pleasant, then 
what is pleasant is good, so that ‘good’ is the genus of 
‘pleasant’. 

If the species be a relative term, see whether the genus be a 
relative term as well: for if the species be a relative term, so too 
is the genus, as is the case with ‘double’ and ‘multiple’: for each 
is a relative term. If, on the other hand, the genus be a relative 
term, there is no necessity that the species should be so as well: 


for ‘knowledge’is a relative term, but not so ‘grammar’. Or 
possibly not even the first statement would be generally 
considered true: for virtue is a kind of ‘noble’ and a kind of 
‘good’ thing, and yet, while ‘virtue’ is a relative term, ‘good’ and 
‘noble’ are not relatives but qualities. Again, see whether the 
species fails to be used in the same relation when called by its 
own name, and when called by the name of its genus: e.g. if the 
term ‘double’ be used to mean the double of a ‘half’, then also 
the term ‘multiple’ ought to be used to mean multiple of a ‘half’. 
Otherwise ‘multiple’ could not be the genus of ‘double’. 

Moreover, see whether the term fail to be used in the same 
relation both when called by the name of its genus, and also 
when called by those of all the genera of its genus. For if the 
double be a multiple of a half, then ‘in excess of ‘will also be 
used in relation to a ‘half’: and, in general, the double will be 
called by the names of all the higher genera in relation to a 
‘half’. An objection may be raised that there is no necessity for a 
term to be used in the same relation when called by its own 
name and when called by that of its genus: for ‘knowledge’ is 
called knowledge ‘of an object’, whereas it is called a ‘state’ and 
‘disposition’ not of an ‘object’ but of the ‘soul’. 

Again, see whether the genus and the species be used in the 
same way in respect of the inflexions they take, e.g. datives and 
genitives and all the rest. For as the species is used, so should 
the genus be as well, as in the case of ‘double’ and its higher 
genera: for we say both ‘double of’ and ‘multiple of’ a thing. 
Likewise, also, in the case of ‘knowledge’: for both knowledge’ 
itself and its genera, e.g. ‘disposition’ and ‘state’, are said to be 
‘of’ something. An objection may be raised that in some cases it 
is not so: for we say ‘superior to’ and ‘contrary to’ so and so, 
whereas ‘other’, which is the genus of these terms, demands 
not ‘to’ but ‘than’: for the expression is ‘other than’ so and so. 


Again, see whether terms used in like case relationships fail to 
yield a like construction when converted, as do ‘double’ and 
‘multiple’. For each of these terms takes a genitive both in itself 
and in its converted form: for we say both a half of’ and ‘a 
fraction of’ something. The case is the same also as regards 
both ‘knowledge’ and ‘conception’: for these take a genitive, and 
by conversion an ‘object of knowledge’ and an ‘object of 
conception’ are both alike used with a dative. If, then, in any 
cases the constructions after conversion be not alike, clearly the 
one term is not the genus of the other. 

Again, see whether the species and the genus fail to be used in 
relation to an equal number of things: for the general view is 
that the uses of both are alike and equal in number, as is the 
case with ‘present’ and ‘grant’. For a present’ is of something or 
to some one, and also a ‘grant’ is of something and to some one: 
and ‘grant’ is the genus of ‘present’, for a ‘present’ is a ‘grant 
that need not be returned’. In some cases, however, the number 
of relations in which the terms are used happens not to be 
equal, for while ‘double’ is double of something, we speak of ‘in 
excess’ or ‘greater’ in something, as well as of or than 
something: for what is in excess or greater is always in excess 
in something, as well as in excess of something. Hence the 
terms in question are not the genera of ‘double’, inasmuch as 
they are not used in relation to an equal number of things with 
the species. Or possibly it is not universally true that species 
and genus are used in relation to an equal number of things. 

See, also, if the opposite of the species have the opposite of the 
genus as its genus, e.g. whether, if ‘multiple’ be the genus of 
‘double’, ‘fraction’ be also the genus of ‘half’. For the opposite of 
the genus should always be the genus of the opposite species. If, 
then, any one were to assert that knowledge is a kind of 
sensation, then also the object of knowledge will have to be a 
kind of object of sensation, whereas it is not: for an object of 


knowledge is not always an object of sensation: for objects of 
knowledge include some of the objects of intuition as well. 
Hence ‘object of sensation’ is not the genus of ‘object of 
knowledge’: and if this be so, neither is ‘sensation’ the genus of 
‘knowledge’. 

Seeing that of relative terms some are of necessity found in, or 
used of, the things in relation to which they happen at any time 
to be used (e.g. ‘disposition’ and ‘state’ and ‘balance’; for in 
nothing else can the aforesaid terms possibly be found except 
in the things in relation to which they are used), while others 
need not be found in the things in relation to which they are 
used at any time, though they still may be (e.g. if the term 
‘object of knowledge’ be applied to the soul: for it is quite 
possible that the knowledge of itself should be possessed by the 
soul itself, but it is not necessary, for it is possible for this same 
knowledge to be found in some one else), while for others, 
again, it is absolutely impossible that they should be found in 
the things in relation to which they happen at any time to be 
used (as e.g. that the contrary should be found in the contrary 
or knowledge in the object of knowledge, unless the object of 
knowledge happen to be a soul or a man) – you should look, 
therefore, and see whether he places a term of one kind inside a 
genus that is not of that kind, e.g. suppose he has said that 
‘memory’ is the ‘abiding of knowledge’. For ‘abiding’ is always 
found in that which abides, and is used of that, so that the 
abiding of knowledge also will be found in knowledge. Memory, 
then, is found in knowledge, seeing that it is the abiding of 
knowledge. But this is impossible, for memory is always found 
in the soul. The aforesaid commonplace rule is common to the 
subject of Accident as well: for it is all the same to say that 
‘abiding’ is the genus of memory, or to allege that it is an 
accident of it. For if in any way whatever memory be the abiding 
of knowledge, the same argument in regard to it will apply. 


Again, see if he has placed what is a ‘state’ inside the genus 
‘activity’, or an activity inside the genus ‘state’, e.g. by defining 
‘sensation’ as ‘movement communicated through the body’: for 
sensation is a ‘state’, whereas movement is an ‘activity’. 
Likewise, also, if he has said that memory is a ‘state that is 
retentive of a conception’, for memory is never a state, but 
rather an activity. 

They also make a bad mistake who rank a ‘state’ within the 
‘capacity’ that attends it, e.g. by defining ‘good temper’ as the 
‘control of anger’, and ‘courage’ and ‘justice’ as ‘control of fears’ 
and of ‘gains’: for the terms ‘courageous’ and ‘good-tempered’ 
are applied to a man who is immune from passion, whereas 
‘self-controlled’ describes the man who is exposed to passion 
and not led by it. Quite possibly, indeed, each of the former is 
attended by a capacity such that, if he were exposed to passion, 
he would control it and not be led by it: but, for all that, this is 
not what is meant by being ‘courageous’ in the one case, and 
‘good tempered’ in the other; what is meant is an absolute 
immunity from any passions of that kind at all. 

Sometimes, also, people state any kind of attendant feature as 
the genus, e.g. ‘pain’ as the genus of ‘anger’ and ‘conception’ as 
that of conviction’. For both of the things in question follow in a 
certain sense upon the given species, but neither of them is 
genus to it. For when the angry man feels pain, the pain bas 
appeared in him earlier than the anger: for his anger is not the 
cause of his pain, but his pain of his anger, so that anger 
emphatically is not pain. By the same reasoning, neither is 
conviction conception: for it is possible to have the same 


conception even without being convinced of it, whereas this is 
impossible if conviction be a species of conception: for it is 
impossible for a thing still to remain the same if it be entirely 
transferred out of its species, just as neither could the same 
animal at one time be, and at another not be, a man. If, on the 
other hand, any one says that a man who has a conception 
must of necessity be also convinced of it, then ‘conception’ and 
‘conviction’ will be used with an equal denotation, so that not 
even so could the former be the genus of the latter: for the 
denotation of the genus should be wider. 

See, also, whether both naturally come to be anywhere in the 
same thing: for what contains the species contains the genus as 
well: e.g. what contains ‘white’ contains ‘colour’ as well, and 
what contains ‘knowledge of grammar’ contains ‘knowledge’ as 
well. If, therefore, any one says that ‘shame’ is ‘fear’, or that 
‘anger’ is ‘pain’, the result will be that genus and species are not 
found in the same thing: for shame is found in the ‘reasoning’ 
faculty, whereas fear is in the ‘spirited’ faculty, and ‘pain’ is 
found in the faculty of ‘desires’. (for in this pleasure also is 
found), whereas ‘anger’ is found in the ‘spirited’ faculty. Hence 
the terms rendered are not the genera, seeing that they do not 
naturally come to be in the same faculty as the species. 
Likewise, also, if ‘friendship’ be found in the faculty of desires, 
you may take it that it is not a form of ‘wishing’: for wishing is 
always found in the ‘reasoning’ faculty. This commonplace rule 
is useful also in dealing with Accident: for the accident and that 
of which it is an accident are both found in the same thing, so 
that if they do not appear in the same thing, clearly it is not an 
accident. 

Again, see if the species partakes of the genus attributed only in 
some particular respect: for it is the general view that the genus 
is not thus imparted only in some particular respect: for a man 
is not an animal in a particular respect, nor is grammar 


knowledge in a particular respect only. Likewise also in other 
instances. Look, therefore, and see if in the case of any of its 
species the genus be imparted only in a certain respect; e.g. if 
‘animal’ has been described as an ‘object of perception’ or of 
‘sight’. For an animal is an object of perception or of sight in a 
particular respect only; for it is in respect of its body that it is 
perceived and seen, not in respect of its soul, so that – ‘object of 
sight’ and ‘object of perception’ could not be the genus of 
‘animal’. 

Sometimes also people place the whole inside the part without 
detection, defining (e.g.) ‘animal’ as an ‘animate body’; whereas 
the part is not predicated in any sense of the whole, so that 
‘body’ could not be the genus of animal, seeing that it is a part. 

See also if he has put anything that is blameworthy or 
objectionable into the class ‘capacity’ or ‘capable’, e.g. by 
defining a ‘sophist’ or a ‘slanderer’, or a ‘thief’ as ‘one who is 
capable of secretly thieving other people’s property’. For none of 
the aforesaid characters is so called because he is ‘capable’ in 
one of these respects: for even God and the good man are 
capable of doing bad things, but that is not their character: for it 
is always in respect of their choice that bad men are so called. 
Moreover, a capacity is always a desirable thing: for even the 
capacities for doing bad things are desirable, and therefore it is 
we say that even God and the good man possess them; for they 
are capable (we say) of doing evil. So then ‘capacity’ can never 
be the genus of anything blameworthy. Else, the result will be 
that what is blameworthy is sometimes desirable: for there will 
be a certain form of capacity that is blameworthy. 

Also, see if he has put anything that is precious or desirable for 
its own sake into the class ‘capacity’ or ‘capable’ or ‘productive’ 
of anything. For capacity, and what is capable or productive of 
anything, is always desirable for the sake of something else. 


Or see if he has put anything that exists in two genera or more 
into one of them only. For some things it is impossible to place 
in a single genus, e.g. the ‘cheat’ and the ‘slanderer’: for neither 
he who has the will without the capacity, nor he who has the 
capacity without the will, is a slanderer or cheat, but he who 
has both of them. Hence he must be put not into one genus, but 
into both the aforesaid genera. 

Moreover, people sometimes in converse order render genus as 
differentia, and differentia as genus, defining (e.g.) 
astonishment as ‘excess of wonderment’ and conviction as 
‘vehemence of conception’. For neither ‘excess’ nor ‘vehemence’ 
is the genus, but the differentia: for astonishment is usually 
taken to be an ‘excessive wonderment’, and conviction to be a 
‘vehement conception’, so that ‘wonderment’ and ‘conception’ 
are the genus, while ‘excess’ and ‘vehemence’ are the 
differentia. Moreover, if any one renders ‘excess’ and 
‘vehemence’ as genera, then inanimate things will be convinced 
and astonished. For ‘vehemence’ and ‘excess’ of a thing are 
found in a thing which is thus vehement and in excess. If, 
therefore, astonishment be excess of wonderment the 
astonishment will be found in the wonderment, so that 
‘wonderment’ will be astonished! Likewise, also, conviction will 
be found in the conception, if it be ‘vehemence of conception’, 
so that the conception will be convinced. Moreover, a man who 
renders an answer in this style will in consequence find himself 
calling vehemence vehement and excess excessive: for there is 
such a thing as a vehement conviction: if then conviction be 
‘vehemence’, there would be a ‘vehement vehemence’. Likewise, 
also, there is such a thing as excessive astonishment: if then 
astonishment be an excess, there would be an ‘excessive 
excess’. Whereas neither of these things is generally believed, 
any more than that knowledge is a knower or motion a moving 
thing. 


Sometimes, too, people make the bad mistake of putting an 
affection into that which is affected, as its genus, e.g. those who 
say that immortality is everlasting life: for immortality seems to 
be a certain affection or accidental feature of life. That this 
saying is true would appear clear if any one were to admit that a 
man can pass from being mortal and become immortal: for no 
one will assert that he takes another life, but that a certain 
accidental feature or affection enters into this one as it is. So 
then ‘life’ is not the genus of immortality. 

Again, see if to an affection he has ascribed as genus the object 
of which it is an affection, by defining (e.g.) wind as ‘air in 
motion’. Rather, wind is ‘a movement of air’: for the same air 
persists both when it is in motion and when it is still. Hence 
wind is not ‘air’ at all: for then there would also have been wind 
when the air was not in motion, seeing that the same air which 
formed the wind persists. Likewise, also, in other cases of the 
kind. Even, then, if we ought in this instance to admit the point 
that wind is ‘air in motion’, yet we should accept a definition of 
the kind, not about all those things of which the genus is not 
true, but only in cases where the genus rendered is a true 
predicate. For in some cases, e.g. ‘mud’ or ‘snow’, it is not 
generally held to be true. For people tell you that snow is ‘frozen 
water’ and mud is earth mixed with moisture’, whereas snow is 
not water, nor mud earth, so that neither of the terms rendered 
could be the genus: for the genus should be true of all its 
species. Likewise neither is wine ‘fermented water’, as 
Empedocles speaks of ‘water fermented in wood’;’ for it simply 
is not water at all. 


Moreover, see whether the term rendered fail to be the genus of 
anything at all; for then clearly it also fails to be the genus of 
the species mentioned. Examine the point by seeing whether 
the objects that partake of the genus fail to be specifically 
different from one another, e.g. white objects: for these do not 
differ specifically from one another, whereas of a genus the 
species are always different, so that ‘white’ could not be the 
genus of anything. 

Again, see whether he has named as genus or differentia some 
feature that goes with everything: for the number of attributes 
that follow everything is comparatively large: thus (e.g.) ‘Being’ 
and ‘Unity’ are among the number of attributes that follow 
everything. If, therefore, he has rendered ‘Being’ as a genus, 
clearly it would be the genus of everything, seeing that it is 
predicated of everything; for the genus is never predicated of 
anything except of its species. Hence Unity, inter alia, will be a 
species of Being. The result, therefore, is that of all things of 
which the genus is predicated, the species is predicated as well, 
seeing that Being and Unity are predicates of absolutely 
everything, whereas the predication of the species ought to be 
of narrower range. If, on the other hand, he has named as 
differentia some attribute that follows everything, clearly the 
denotation of the differentia will be equal to, or wider than, that 
of the genus. For if the genus, too, be some attribute that follows 
everything, the denotation of the differentia will be equal to its 
denotation, while if the genus do not follow everything, it will 
be still wider. 

Moreover, see if the description ‘inherent in S’ be used of the 
genus rendered in relation to its species, as it is used of ‘white’ 
in the case of snow, thus showing clearly that it could not be the 
genus: for ‘true of S’ is the only description used of the genus in 


relation to its species. Look and see also if the genus fails to be 
synonymous with its species. For the genus is always predicated 
of its species synonymously. 

Moreover, beware, whenever both species and genus have a 
contrary, and he places the better of the contraries inside the 
worse genus: for the result will be that the remaining species 
will be found in the remaining genus, seeing that contraries are 
found in contrary genera, so that the better species will be 
found in the worse genus and the worse in the better: whereas 
the usual view is that of the better species the genus too is 
better. Also see if he has placed the species inside the worse 
and not inside the better genus, when it is at the same time 
related in like manner to both, as (e.g.) if he has defined the 
‘soul’ as a ‘form of motion’ or ‘a form of moving thing’. For the 
same soul is usually thought to be a principle alike of rest and 
of motion, so that, if rest is the better of the two, this is the 
genus into which the soul should have been put. 

Moreover, judge by means of greater and less degrees: if 
overthrowing a view, see whether the genus admits of a greater 
degree, whereas neither the species itself does so, nor any term 
that is called after it: e.g. if virtue admits of a greater degree, so 
too does justice and the just man: for one man is called ‘more 
just than another’. If, therefore, the genus rendered admits of a 
greater degree, whereas neither the species does so itself nor 
yet any term called after it, then what has been rendered could 
not be the genus. 

Again, if what is more generally, or as generally, thought to be 
the genus be not so, clearly neither is the genus rendered. The 
commonplace rule in question is useful especially in cases 
where the species appears to have several predicates in the 
category of essence, and where no distinction has been drawn 
between them, and we cannot say which of them is genus; e.g. 


both ‘pain’ and the ‘conception of a slight’ are usually thought 
to be predicates of ‘anger in the category of essence: for the 
angry man is both in pain and also conceives that he is slighted. 
The same mode of inquiry may be applied also to the case of 
the species, by comparing it with some other species: for if the 
one which is more generally, or as generally, thought to be 
found in the genus rendered be not found therein, then clearly 
neither could the species rendered be found therein. 

In demolishing a view, therefore, you should follow the rule as 
stated. In establishing one, on the other hand, the 
commonplace rule that you should see if both the genus 
rendered and the species admit of a greater degree will not 
serve: for even though both admit it, it is still possible for one 
not to be the genus of the other. For both ‘beautiful’ and ‘white’ 
admit of a greater degree, and neither is the genus of the other. 
On the other hand, the comparison of the genera and of the 
species one with another is of use: e.g. supposing A and B to 
have a like claim to be genus, then if one be a genus, so also is 
the other. Likewise, also, if what has less claim be a genus, so 
also is what has more claim: e.g. if ‘capacity’ have more claim 
than ‘virtue’ to be the genus of self-control, and virtue be the 
genus, so also is capacity. The same observations will apply also 
in the case of the species. For instance, supposing A and B to 
have a like claim to be a species of the genus in question, then if 
the one be a species, so also is the other: and if that which is 
less generally thought to be so be a species, so also is that 
which is more generally thought to be so. 

Moreover, to establish a view, you should look and see if the 
genus is predicated in the category of essence of those things of 
which it has been rendered as the genus, supposing the species 
rendered to be not one single species but several different ones: 
for then clearly it will be the genus. If, on the other, the species 
rendered be single, look and see whether the genus be 


predicated in the category of essence of other species as well: 
for then, again, the result will be that it is predicated of several 
different species. 

Since some people think that the differentia, too, is a predicate 
of the various species in the category of essence, you should 
distinguish the genus from the differentia by employing the 
aforesaid elementary principles – (a) that the genus has a wider 
denotation than the differentia; (b) that in rendering the 
essence of a thing it is more fitting to state the genus than the 
differentia: for any one who says that ‘man’ is an ‘animal’ 
shows what man is better than he who describes him as 
‘walking’; also (c) that the differentia always signifies a quality 
of the genus, whereas the genus does not do this of the 
differentia: for he who says ‘walking’ describes an animal of a 
certain quality, whereas he who says ‘animal’ describes an 
animal of a certain quality, whereas he who says ‘animal’ does 
not describe a walking thing of a certain quality. 

The differentia, then, should be distinguished from the genus in 
this manner. Now seeing it is generally held that if what is 
musical, in being musical, possesses knowledge in some 
respect, then also ‘music’ is a particular kind of ‘knowledge’; 
and also that if what walks is moved in walking, then ‘walking’ 
is a particular kind of ‘movement’; you should therefore 
examine in the aforesaid manner any genus in which you want 
to establish the existence of something; e.g. if you wish to prove 
that ‘knowledge’ is a form of ‘conviction’, see whether the 
knower in knowing is convinced: for then clearly knowledge 
would be a particular kind of conviction. You should proceed in 
the same way also in regard to the other cases of this kind. 

Moreover, seeing that it is difficult to distinguish whatever 
always follows along with a thing, and is not convertible with it, 
from its genus, if A follows B universally, whereas B does not 


follow A universally – as e.g. ‘rest’ always follows a ‘calm’ and 
‘divisibility’ follows ‘number’, but not conversely (for the 
divisible is not always a number, nor rest a calm) – you may 
yourself assume in your treatment of them that the one which 
always follows is the genus, whenever the other is not 
convertible with it: if, on the other hand, some one else puts 
forward the proposition, do not accept it universally. An 
objection to it is that ‘not-being’ always follows what is ‘coming 
to be’ (for what is coming to be is not) and is not convertible 
with it (for what is not is not always coming to be), and that still 
‘not-being’ is not the genus of ‘coming to be’: for ‘not-being’ has 
not any species at all. Questions, then, in regard to Genus 
should be investigated in the ways described. 

Book V 

The question whether the attribute stated is or is not a property, 
should be examined by the following methods: 

Any ‘property’ rendered is always either essential and 
permanent or relative and temporary: e.g. it is an ‘essential 
property’ of man to be ‘by nature a civilized animal’: a ‘relative 
property’ is one like that of the soul in relation to the body, viz. 
that the one is fitted to command, and the other to obey: a 
‘permanent property’ is one like the property which belongs to 
God, of being an ‘immortal living being’: a ‘temporary property’ 


is one like the property which belongs to any particular man of 
walking in the gymnasium. 

[The rendering of a property ‘relatively’ gives rise either to two 
problems or to four. For if he at the same time render this 
property of one thing and deny it of another, only two problems 
arise, as in the case of a statement that it is a property of a man, 
in relation to a horse, to be a biped. For one might try both to 
show that a man is not a biped, and also that a horse is a biped: 
in both ways the property would be upset. If on the other hand 
he render one apiece of two attributes to each of two things, 
and deny it in each case of the other, there will then be four 
problems; as in the case of a statement that it is a property of a 
man in relation to a horse for the former to be a biped and the 
latter a quadruped. For then it is possible to try to show both 
that a man is not naturally a biped, and that he is a quadruped, 
and also that the horse both is a biped, and is not a quadruped. 
If you show any of these at all, the intended attribute is 
demolished.] 

An ‘essential’ property is one which is rendered of a thing in 
comparison with everything else and distinguishes the said 
thing from everything else, as does ‘a mortal living being 
capable of receiving knowledge’ in the case of man. A ‘relative’ 
property is one which separates its subject off not from 
everything else but only from a particular definite thing, as does 
the property which virtue possesses, in comparison with 
knowledge, viz. that the former is naturally produced in more 
than one faculty, whereas the latter is produced in that of 
reason alone, and in those who have a reasoning faculty. A 
‘permanent’ property is one which is true at every time, and 
never fails, like being’ compounded of soul and body’, in the 
case of a living creature. A ‘temporary’ property is one which is 
true at some particular time, and does not of necessity always 


follow; as, of some particular man, that he walks in the marketplace. 


To render a property ‘relatively’ to something else means to 
state the difference between them as it is found either 
universally and always, or generally and in most cases: thus a 
difference that is found universally and always, is one such as 
man possesses in comparison with a horse, viz. being a biped: 
for a man is always and in every case a biped, whereas a horse 
is never a biped at any time. On the other hand, a difference 
that is found generally and in most cases, is one such as the 
faculty of reason possesses in comparison with that of desire 
and spirit, in that the former commands, while the latter obeys: 
for the reasoning faculty does not always command, but 
sometimes also is under command, nor is that of desire and 
spirit always under command, but also on occasion assumes 
the command, whenever the soul of a man is vicious. 

Of ‘properties’ the most ‘arguable’ are the essential and 
permanent and the relative. For a relative property gives rise, as 
we said before, to several questions: for of necessity the 
questions arising are either two or four, or that arguments in 
regard to these are several. An essential and a permanent 
property you can discuss in relation to many things, or can 
observe in relation to many periods of time: if essential’, discuss 
it in comparison with many things: for the property ought to 
belong to its subject in comparison with every single thing that 
is, so that if the subject be not distinguished by it in comparison 
with everything else, the property could not have been rendered 
correctly. So a permanent property you should observe in 
relation to many periods of time; for if it does not or did not, or 
is not going to, belong, it will not be a property. On the other 
hand, about a temporary property we do not inquire further 
than in regard to the time called ‘the present’; and so 
arguments in regard to it are not many; whereas an arguable’ 


question is one in regard to which it is possible for arguments 
both numerous and good to arise. 

The so-called ‘relative’ property, then, should be examined by 
means of the commonplace arguments relating to Accident, to 
see whether it belongs to the one thing and not to the other: on 
the other hand, permanent and essential properties should be 
considered by the following methods. 

First, see whether the property has or has not been rendered 
correctly. Of a rendering being incorrect or correct, one test is to 
see whether the terms in which the property is stated are not or 
are more intelligible – for destructive purposes, whether they 
are not so, and for constructive purposes, whether they are so. 
Of the terms not being more intelligible, one test is to see 
whether the property which he renders is altogether more 
unintelligible than the subject whose property he has stated: 
for, if so, the property will not have been stated correctly. For the 
object of getting a property constituted is to be intelligible: the 
terms therefore in which it is rendered should be more 
intelligible: for in that case it will be possible to conceive it more 
adequately, e.g. any one who has stated that it is a property of 
‘fire’ to ‘bear a very close resemblance to the soul’, uses the 
term ‘soul’, which is less intelligible than ‘fire’ – for we know 
better what fire is than what soul is –, and therefore a ‘very 
close resemblance to the soul’ could not be correctly stated to 
be a property of fire. Another test is to see whether the 
attribution of A (property) to B (subject) fails to be more 
intelligible. For not only should the property be more intelligible 
than its subject, but also it should be something whose 


attribution to the particular subject is a more intelligible 
attribution. For he who does not know whether it is an attribute 
of the particular subject at all, will not know either whether it 
belongs to it alone, so that whichever of these results happens, 
its character as a property becomes obscure. Thus (e.g.) a man 
who has stated that it is a property of fire to be ‘the primary 
element wherein the soul is naturally found’, has introduced a 
subject which is less intelligible than ‘fire’, viz. whether the soul 
is found in it, and whether it is found there primarily; and 
therefore to be ‘the primary element in which the soul is 
naturally found’ could not be correctly stated to be a property of 
‘fire’. On the other hand, for constructive purposes, see whether 
the terms in which the property is stated are more intelligible, 
and if they are more intelligible in each of the aforesaid ways. 
For then the property will have been correctly stated in this 
respect: for of constructive arguments, showing the correctness 
of a rendering, some will show the correctness merely in this 
respect, while others will show it without qualification. Thus 
(e.g.) a man who has said that the ‘possession of sensation’ is a 
property of ‘animal’ has both used more intelligible terms and 
has rendered the property more intelligible in each of the 
aforesaid senses; so that to ‘possess sensation’ would in this 
respect have been correctly rendered as a property of ‘animal’. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether any of the terms 
rendered in the property is used in more than one sense, or 
whether the whole expression too signifies more than one 
thing. For then the property will not have been correctly stated. 
Thus (e.g.) seeing that to ‘being natural sentient’ signifies more 
than one thing, viz. (1) to possess sensation, (2) to use one’s 
sensation, being naturally sentient’ could not be a correct 
statement of a property of ‘animal’. The reason why the term 
you use, or the whole expression signifying the property, should 
not bear more than one meaning is this, that an expression 
bearing more than one meaning makes the object described 


obscure, because the man who is about to attempt an argument 
is in doubt which of the various senses the expression bears: 
and this will not do, for the object of rendering the property is 
that he may understand. Moreover, in addition to this, it is 
inevitable that those who render a property after this fashion 
should be somehow refuted whenever any one addresses his 
syllogism to that one of the term’s several meanings which does 
not agree. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see 
whether both all the terms and also the expression as a whole 
avoid bearing more than one sense: for then the property will 
have been correctly stated in this respect. Thus (e.g.) seeing that 
‘body’ does not bear several meanings, nor quickest to move 
upwards in space’, nor yet the whole expression made by 
putting them together, it would be correct in this respect to say 
that it is a property of fire to be the ‘body quickest to move 
upwards in space’. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the term of which he 
renders the property is used in more than one sense, and no 
distinction has been drawn as to which of them it is whose 
property he is stating: for then the property will not have been 
correctly rendered. The reasons why this is so are quite clear 
from what has been said above: for the same results are bound 
to follow. Thus (e.g.) seeing that ‘the knowledge of this’ signifies 
many things for it means (1) the possession of knowledge by it, 

(2) the use of its knowledge by it, (3) the existence of knowledge 
about it, (4) the use of knowledge about it – no property of the 
‘knowledge of this’ could be rendered correctly unless he draw a 
distinction as to which of these it is whose property he is 
rendering. For constructive purposes, a man should see if the 
term of which he is rendering the property avoids bearing many 
senses and is one and simple: for then the property will have 
been correctly stated in this respect. Thus (e.g.) seeing that 
‘man’ is used in a single sense, ‘naturally civilized animal’ 
would be correctly stated as a property of man. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether the same term has 
been repeated in the property. For people often do this 
undetected in rendering ‘properties’ also, just as they do in their 
‘definitions’ as well: but a property to which this has happened 
will not have been correctly stated: for the repetition of it 
confuses the hearer; thus inevitably the meaning becomes 
obscure, and further, such people are thought to babble. 
Repetition of the same term is likely to happen in two ways; one 
is, when a man repeatedly uses the same word, as would 
happen if any one were to render, as a property of fire, ‘the body 
which is the most rarefied of bodies’ (for he has repeated the 
word ‘body’); the second is, if a man replaces words by their 
definitions, as would happen if any one were to render, as a 
property of earth, ‘the substance which is by its nature most 
easily of all bodies borne downwards in space’, and were then to 
substitute ‘substances of such and such a kind’ for the word 
‘bodies’: for ‘body’ and ‘a substance of such and such a kind’ 
mean one and the same thing. For he will have repeated the 
word ‘substance’, and accordingly neither of the properties 
would be correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on the 
other hand, see whether he avoids ever repeating the same 
term; for then the property will in this respect have been 
correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) seeing that he who has stated 
‘animal capable of acquiring knowledge’ as a property of man 
has avoided repeating the same term several times, the 
property would in this respect have been correctly rendered of 
man. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered in 
the property any such term as is a universal attribute. For one 
which does not distinguish its subject from other things is 
useless, and it is the business of the language Of ‘properties’, as 
also of the language of definitions, to distinguish. In the case 
contemplated, therefore, the property will not have been 
correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a 


property of knowledge to be a ‘conception incontrovertible by 
argument, because of its unity’, has used in the property a term 
of that kind, viz. ‘unity’, which is a universal attribute; and 
therefore the property of knowledge could not have been 
correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, 
see whether he has avoided all terms that are common to 
everything and used a term that distinguishes the subject from 
something: for then the property will in this respect have been 
correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as he who has said that it 
is a property of a ‘living creature’ to ‘have a soul’ has used no 
term that is common to everything, it would in this respect 
have been correctly stated to be a property of a ‘living creature’ 
to ‘have a soul’. 

Next, for destructive purposes see whether he renders more 
than one property of the same thing, without a definite proviso 
that he is stating more than one: for then the property will not 
have been correctly stated. For just as in the case of definitions 
too there should be no further addition beside the expression 
which shows the essence, so too in the case of properties 
nothing further should be rendered beside the expression that 
constitutes the property mentioned: for such an addition is 
made to no purpose. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that it is a 
property of fire to be ‘the most rarefied and lightest body’ has 
rendered more than one property (for each term is a true 
predicate of fire alone); and so it could not be a correctly stated 
property of fire to be ‘the most rarefied and lightest body’. On 
the other hand, for constructive purposes, see whether he has 
avoided rendering more than one property of the same thing, 
and has rendered one only: for then the property will in this 
respect have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has 
said that it is a property of a liquid to be a ‘body adaptable to 
every shape’ has rendered as its property a single character and 
not several, and so the property of ‘liquid’ would in this respect 
have been correctly stated. 


Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has employed 
either the actual subject whose property he is rendering, or any 
of its species: for then the property will not have been correctly 
stated. For the object of rendering the property is that people 
may understand: now the subject itself is just as unintelligible 
as it was to start with, while any one of its species is posterior 
to it, and so is no more intelligible. Accordingly it is impossible 
to understand anything further by the use of these terms. Thus 
(e.g.) any one who has said that it is property of ‘animal’ to be 
‘the substance to which «man» belongs as a species’ has 
employed one of its species, and therefore the property could 
not have been correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on 
the other hand, see whether he avoids introducing either the 
subject itself or any of its species: for then the property will in 
this respect have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who 
has stated that it is a property of a living creature to be 
‘compounded of soul and body’ has avoided introducing among 
the rest either the subject itself or any of its species, and 
therefore in this respect the property of a ‘living creature’ would 
have been correctly rendered. 

You should inquire in the same way also in the case of other 
terms that do or do not make the subject more intelligible: thus, 
for destructive purposes, see whether he has employed 
anything either opposite to the subject or, in general, anything 
simultaneous by nature with it or posterior to it: for then the 
property will not have been correctly stated. For an opposite is 
simultaneous by nature with its opposite, and what is 
simultaneous by nature or is posterior to it does not make its 
subject more intelligible. Thus (e.g.) any one who has said that it 


is a property of good to be ‘the most direct opposite of evil’, has 
employed the opposite of good, and so the property of good 
could not have been correctly rendered. For constructive 
purposes, on the other hand, see whether he has avoided 
employing anything either opposite to, or, in general, 
simultaneous by nature with the subject, or posterior to it: for 
then the property will in this respect have been correctly 
rendered. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property 
of knowledge to be ‘the most convincing conception’ has 
avoided employing anything either opposite to, or simultaneous 
by nature with, or posterior to, the subject; and so the property 
of knowledge would in this respect have been correctly stated. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered as 
property something that does not always follow the subject but 
sometimes ceases to be its property: for then the property will 
not have been correctly described. For there is no necessity 
either that the name of the subject must also be true of 
anything to which we find such an attribute belonging; nor yet 
that the name of the subject will be untrue of anything to which 
such an attribute is found not to belong. Moreover, in addition 
to this, even after he has rendered the property it will not be 
clear whether it belongs, seeing that it is the kind of attribute 
that may fall: and so the property will not be clear. Thus (e.g.) a 
man who has stated that it is a property of animal ‘sometimes 
to move and sometimes to stand still’ rendered the kind of 
property which sometimes is not a property, and so the 
property could not have been correctly stated. For constructive 
purposes, on the other hand, see whether he has rendered 
something that of necessity must always be a property: for then 
the property will have been in this respect correctly stated. Thus 
(e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property of virtue to be 
‘what makes its possessor good’ has rendered as property 
something that always follows, and so the property of virtue 
would in this respect have been correctly rendered. 


Next, for destructive purposes, see whether in rendering the 
property of the present time he has omitted to make a definite 
proviso that it is the property of the present time which he is 
rendering: for else the property will not have been correctly 
stated. For in the first place, any unusual procedure always 
needs a definite proviso: and it is the usual procedure for 
everybody to render as property some attribute that always 
follows. In the second place, a man who omits to provide 
definitely whether it was the property of the present time 
which he intended to state, is obscure: and one should not give 
any occasion for adverse criticism. Thus (e.g.) a man who has 
stated it as the property of a particular man ‘to be sitting with a 
particular man’, states the property of the present time, and so 
he cannot have rendered the property correctly, seeing that he 
has described it without any definite proviso. For constructive 
purposes, on the other hand, see whether, in rendering the 
property of the present time, he has, in stating it, made a 
definite proviso that it is the property of the present time that 
he is stating: for then the property will in this respect have been 
correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that it is the 
property of a particular man ‘to be walking now’, has made this 
distinction in his statement, and so the property would have 
been correctly stated. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered a 
property of the kind whose appropriateness is not obvious 
except by sensation: for then the property will not have been 
correctly stated. For every sensible attribute, once it is taken 
beyond the sphere of sensation, becomes uncertain. For it is not 
clear whether it still belongs, because it is evidenced only by 
sensation. This principle will be true in the case of any 
attributes that do not always and necessarily follow. Thus (e.g.) 
any one who has stated that it is a property of the sun to be ‘the 
brightest star that moves over the earth’, has used in describing 
the property an expression of that kind, viz. ‘to move over the 


earth’, which is evidenced by sensation; and so the sun’s 
property could not have been correctly rendered: for it will be 
uncertain, whenever the sun sets, whether it continues to move 
over the earth, because sensation then fails us. For constructive 
purposes, on the other hand, see whether he has rendered the 
property of a kind that is not obvious to sensation, or, if it be 
sensible, must clearly belong of necessity: for then the property 
will in this respect have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man 
who has stated that it is a property of a surface to be ‘the 
primary thing that is coloured’, has introduced amongst the rest 
a sensible quality, ‘to be coloured’, but still a quality such as 
manifestly always belongs, and so the property of ‘surface’ 
would in this respect have been correctly rendered. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered the 
definition as a property: for then the property will not have 
been correctly stated: for the property of a thing ought not to 
show its essence. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that it is the 
property of man to be ‘a walking, biped animal’ has rendered a 
property of man so as to signify his essence, and so the property 
of man could not have been correctly rendered. For constructive 
purposes, on the other hand, see whether the property which 
he has rendered forms a predicate convertible with its subject, 
without, however, signifying its essence: for then the property 
will in this respect have been correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) he 
who has stated that it is a property of man to be a ‘naturally 
civilized animal’ has rendered the property so as to be 
convertible with its subject, without, however, showing its 
essence, and so the property of man’ would in this respect have 
been correctly rendered. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered the 
property without having placed the subject within its essence. 
For of properties, as also of definitions, the first term to be 
rendered should be the genus, and then the rest of it should be 


appended immediately afterwards, and should distinguish its 
subject from other things. Hence a property which is not stated 
in this way could not have been correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) a 
man who has said that it is a property of a living creature to 
‘have a soul’ has not placed ‘living creature’ within its essence, 
and so the property of a living creature could not have been 
correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, 
see whether a man first places within its essence the subject 
whose property he is rendering, and then appends the rest: for 
then the property will in this respect have been correctly 
rendered. Thus (e.g.) he who has stated that is a property of 
man to be an ‘animal capable of receiving knowledge’, has 
rendered the property after placing the subject within its 
essence, and so the property of ‘man’ would in this respect have 
been correctly rendered. 

The inquiry, then, whether the property has been correctly 
rendered or no, should be made by these means. The question, 
on the other hand, whether what is stated is or is not a property 
at all, you should examine from the following points of view. For 
the commonplace arguments which establish absolutely that 
the property is accurately stated will be the same as those that 
constitute it a property at all: accordingly they will be described 
in the course of them. 

Firstly, then, for destructive purposes, take a look at each 
subject of which he has rendered the property, and see (e.g.) if it 
fails to belong to any of them at all, or to be true of them in that 
particular respect, or to be a property of each of them in respect 
of that character of which he has rendered the property: for 


then what is stated to be a property will not be a property. Thus, 
for example, inasmuch as it is not true of the geometrician that 
he ‘cannot be deceived by an argument’ (for a geometrician is 
deceived when his figure is misdrawn), it could not be a 
property of the man of science that he is not deceived by an 
argument. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see 
whether the property rendered be true of every instance, and 
true in that particular respect: for then what is stated not to be 
a property will be a property. Thus, for example, in as much as 
the description ‘an animal capable of receiving knowledge’ is 
true of every man, and true of him qua man, it would be a 
property of man to be ‘an animal capable of receiving 
knowledge’. commonplace rule means – for destructive 
purposes, see if the description fails to be true of that of which 
the name is true; and if the name fails to be true of that of 
which the description is true: for constructive purposes, on the 
other hand, see if the description too is predicated of that of 
which the name is predicated, and if the name too is predicated 
of that of which the description is predicated.] 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the description fails to 
apply to that to which the name applies, and if the name fails to 
apply to that to which the description applies: for then what is 
stated to be a property will not be a property. Thus (e.g.) 
inasmuch as the description ‘a living being that partakes of 
knowledge’ is true of God, while ‘man’ is not predicated of God, 
to be a living being that partakes of knowledge’ could not be a 
property of man. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, 
see if the name as well be predicated of that of which the 
description is predicated, and if the description as well be 
predicated of that of which the name is predicated. For then 
what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) 
the predicate ‘living creature’ is true of that of which ‘having a 
soul’ is true, and ‘having a soul’ is true of that of which the 


predicate ‘living creature’ is true; and so ‘having a soul would be 
a property of ‘living creature’. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has rendered a subject 
as a property of that which is described as ‘in the subject’: for 
then what has been stated to be a property will not be a 
property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as he who has rendered ‘fire’ as 
the property of ‘the body with the most rarefied particles’, has 
rendered the subject as the property of its predicate, ‘fire’ could 
not be a property of ‘the body with the most rarefied particles’. 
The reason why the subject will not be a property of that which 
is found in the subject is this, that then the same thing will be 
the property of a number of things that are specifically 
different. For the same thing has quite a number of specifically 
different predicates that belong to it alone, and the subject will 
be a property of all of these, if any one states the property in 
this way. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he 
has rendered what is found in the subject as a property of the 
subject: for then what has been stated not to be a property will 
be a property, if it be predicated only of the things of which it 
has been stated to be the property. Thus (e.g.) he who has said 
that it is a property of ‘earth’ to be ‘specifically the heaviest 
body’ has rendered of the subject as its property something that 
is said of the thing in question alone, and is said of it in the 
manner in which a property is predicated, and so the property 
of earth would have been rightly stated. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has rendered the 
property as partaken of: for then what is stated to be a property 
will not be a property. For an attribute of which the subject 
partakes is a constituent part of its essence: and an attribute of 
that kind would be a differentia applying to some one species. 

E.g. inasmuch as he who has said that ‘walking on two feet’ is 
property of man has rendered the property as partaken of, 
‘walking on two feet’ could not be a property of ‘man’. For 

constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he has avoided 
rendering the property as partaken of, or as showing the 
essence, though the subject is predicated convertibly with it: for 
then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus 
(e.g.) he who has stated that to be ‘naturally sentient’ is a 
property of ‘animal’ has rendered the property neither as 
partaken of nor as showing the essence, though the subject is 
predicated convertibly with it; and so to be ‘naturally sentient’ 
would be a property of ‘animal’. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the property cannot 
possibly belong simultaneously, but must belong either as 
posterior or as prior to the attribute described in the name: for 
then what is stated to be a property will not be a property either 
never, or not always. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is possible for 
the attribute ‘walking through the market-place’ to belong to an 
object as prior and as posterior to the attribute ‘man’, ‘walking 
through the market-place’ could not be a property of ‘man’ 
either never, or not always. For constructive purposes, on the 
other hand, see if it always and of necessity belongs 
simultaneously, without being either a definition or a 
differentia: for then what is stated not to be a property will be a 
property. Thus (e.g.) the attribute ‘an animal capable of receiving 
knowledge’ always and of necessity belongs simultaneously 
with the attribute ‘man’, and is neither differentia nor definition 
of its subject, and so ‘an animal capable of receiving knowledge’ 
would be a property of ‘man’. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the same thing fails to be a 
property of things that are the same as the subject, so far as 
they are the same: for then what is stated to be a property will 
not be a property. Thus, for example, inasmuch as it is no 
property of a ‘proper object of pursuit’ to ‘appear good to certain 
persons’, it could not be a property of the ‘desirable’ either to 
‘appear good to certain persons’: for ‘proper object of pursuit’ 


and ‘desirable’ mean the same. For constructive purposes, on 
the other hand, see if the same thing be a property of 
something that is the same as the subject, in so far as it is the 
same. For then is stated not to be a property will be a property. 
Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is called a property of a man, in so far 
as he is a man, ‘to have a tripartite soul’, it would also be a 
property of a mortal, in so far as he is a mortal, to have a 
tripartite soul. This commonplace rule is useful also in dealing 
with Accident: for the same attributes ought either to belong or 
not belong to the same things, in so far as they are the same. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the property of things that 
are the same in kind as the subject fails to be always the same 
in kind as the alleged property: for then neither will what is 
stated to be the property of the subject in question. Thus (e.g.) 
inasmuch as a man and a horse are the same in kind, and it is 
not always a property of a horse to stand by its own initiative, it 
could not be a property of a man to move by his own initiative; 
for to stand and to move by his own initiative are the same in 
kind, because they belong to each of them in so far as each is an 
‘animal’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if of 
things that are the same in kind as the subject the property that 
is the same as the alleged property is always true: for then what 
is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) since 
it is a property of man to be a ‘walking biped,’ it would also be a 
property of a bird to be a ‘flying biped’: for each of these is the 
same in kind, in so far as the one pair have the sameness of 
species that fall under the same genus, being under the genus 
‘animal’, while the other pair have that of differentiae of the 
genus, viz. of ‘animal’. This commonplace rule is deceptive 
whenever one of the properties mentioned belongs to some one 
species only while the other belongs to many, as does ‘walking 
quadruped’. 


Inasmuch as ‘same’ and ‘different’ are terms used in several 
senses, it is a job to render to a sophistical questioner a 
property that belongs to one thing and that only. For an 
attribute that belongs to something qualified by an accident will 
also belong to the accident taken along with the subject which 
it qualifies; e.g. an attribute that belongs to ‘man’ will belong 
also to ‘white man’, if there be a white man, and one that 
belongs to ‘white man’ will belong also to ‘man’. One might, 
then, bring captious criticism against the majority of properties, 
by representing the subject as being one thing in itself, and 
another thing when combined with its accident, saying, for 
example, that ‘man’ is one thing, and white man’ another, and 
moreover by representing as different a certain state and what 
is called after that state. For an attribute that belongs to the 
state will belong also to what is called after that state, and one 
that belongs to what is called after a state will belong also to 
the state: e.g. inasmuch as the condition of the scientist is 
called after his science, it could not be a property of ‘science’ 
that it is ‘incontrovertible by argument’; for then the scientist 
also will be incontrovertible by argument. For constructive 
purposes, however, you should say that the subject of an 
accident is not absolutely different from the accident taken 
along with its subject; though it is called ‘another’ thing 
because the mode of being of the two is different: for it is not 
the same thing for a man to be a man and for a white man to be 
a white man. Moreover, you should take a look along at the 
inflections, and say that the description of the man of science is 
wrong: one should say not ‘it’ but ‘he is incontrovertible by 
argument’; while the description of Science is wrong too: one 
should say not ‘it’ but ‘she is incontrovertible by argument’. For 
against an objector who sticks at nothing the defence should 
stick at nothing. 


Next, for destructive purposes, see if, while intending to render 
an attribute that naturally belongs, he states it in his language 
in such a way as to indicate one that invariably belongs: for 
then it would be generally agreed that what has been stated to 
be a property is upset. Thus (e.g.) the man who has said that 
‘biped’ is a property of man intends to render the attribute that 
naturally belongs, but his expression actually indicates one that 
invariably belongs: accordingly, ‘biped’ could not be a property 
of man: for not every man is possessed of two feet. For 
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he intends to 
render the property that naturally belongs, and indicates it in 
that way in his language: for then the property will not be upset 
in this respect. Thus (e.g.) he who renders as a property of ‘man’ 
the phrase ‘an animal capable of receiving knowledge’ both 
intends, and by his language indicates, the property that 
belongs by nature, and so ‘an animal capable of receiving 
knowledge’ would not be upset or shown in that respect not to 
be a property of man. 

Moreover, as regards all the things that are called as they are 
primarily after something else, or primarily in themselves, it is a 
job to render the property of such things. For if you render a 
property as belonging to the subject that is so called after 
something else, then it will be true of its primary subject as 
well; whereas if you state it of its primary subject, then it will be 
predicated also of the thing that is so called after this other. 
Thus (e.g.) if any one renders , coloured’ as the property of 
‘surface’, ‘coloured’ will be true of body as well; whereas if he 
render it of ‘body’, it will be predicated also of ‘surface’. Hence 
the name as well will not be true of that of which the 
description is true. 


In the case of some properties it mostly happens that some 
error is incurred because of a failure to define how as well as to 
what things the property is stated to belong. For every one tries 
to render as the property of a thing something that belongs to it 
either naturally, as ‘biped’ belongs to ‘man’, or actually, as 
‘having four fingers’ belongs to a particular man, or specifically, 
as ‘consisting of most rarefied particles’ belongs to ‘fire’, or 
absolutely, as ‘life’ to ‘living being’, or one that belongs to a 
thing only as called after something else, as ‘wisdom’ to the 
‘soul’, or on the other hand primarily, as ‘wisdom’ to the 
‘rational faculty’, or because the thing is in a certain state, as 
‘incontrovertible by argument’ belongs to a ‘scientist’ (for simply 
and solely by reason of his being in a certain state will he be 
‘incontrovertible by argument’), or because it is the state 
possessed by something, as ‘incontrovertible by argument’ 
belongs to ‘science’, or because it is partaken of, as ‘sensation’ 
belongs to ‘animal’ (for other things as well have sensation, e.g. 
man, but they have it because they already partake of ‘animal’), 
or because it partakes of something else, as ‘life’ belongs to a 
particular kind of ‘living being’. Accordingly he makes a mistake 
if he has failed to add the word ‘naturally’, because what 
belongs naturally may fail to belong to the thing to which it 
naturally belongs, as (e.g.) it belongs to a man to have two feet: 
so too he errs if he does not make a definite proviso that he is 
rendering what actually belongs, because one day that attribute 
will not be what it now is, e.g. the man’s possession of four 
fingers. So he errs if he has not shown that he states a thing to 
be such and such primarily, or that he calls it so after something 
else, because then its name too will not be true of that of which 
the description is true, as is the case with ‘coloured’, whether 
rendered as a property of ‘surface’ or of ‘body’. So he errs if he 
has not said beforehand that he has rendered a property to a 
thing either because that thing possesses a state, or because it 
is a state possessed by something; because then it will not be a 


property. For, supposing he renders the property to something 
as being a state possessed, it will belong to what possesses that 
state; while supposing he renders it to what possesses the state, 
it will belong to the state possessed, as did ‘incontrovertible by 
argument’ when stated as a property of ‘science’ or of the 
‘scientist’. So he errs if he has not indicated beforehand that the 
property belongs because the thing partakes of, or is partaken 
of by, something; because then the property will belong to 
certain other things as well. For if he renders it because its 
subject is partaken of, it will belong to the things which partake 
of it; whereas if he renders it because its subject partakes of 
something else, it will belong to the things partaken of, as (e.g.) 
if he were to state ‘life’ to be a property of a ‘particular kind of 
living being’, or just of ‘living being. So he errs if he has not 
expressly distinguished the property that belongs specifically, 
because then it will belong only to one of the things that fall 
under the term of which he states the property: for the 
superlative belongs only to one of them, e.g. ‘lightest’ as applied 
to ‘fire’. Sometimes, too, a man may even add the word 
‘specifically’, and still make a mistake. For the things in 
question should all be of one species, whenever the word 
‘specifically’ is added: and in some cases this does not occur, as 
it does not, in fact, in the case of fire. For fire is not all of one 
species; for live coals and flame and light are each of them ‘fire’, 
but are of different species. The reason why, whenever 
‘specifically’ is added, there should not be any species other 
than the one mentioned, is this, that if there be, then the 
property in question will belong to some of them in a greater 
and to others in a less degree, as happens with ‘consisting of 
most rarefied particles’ in the case of fire: for ‘light’ consists of 
more rarefied particles than live coals and flame. And this 
should not happen unless the name too be predicated in a 
greater degree of that of which the description is truer; 
otherwise the rule that where the description is truer the name 


too should be truer is not fulfilled. Moreover, in addition to this, 
the same attribute will be the property both of the term which 
has it absolutely and of that element therein which has it in the 
highest degree, as is the condition of the property ‘consisting of 
most rarefied particles’ in the case of ‘fire’: for this same 
attribute will be the property of ‘light’ as well: for it is ‘light’ that 
‘consists of the most rarefied particles’. If, then, any one else 
renders a property in this way one should attack it; for oneself, 
one should not give occasion for this objection, but should 
define in what manner one states the property at the actual 
time of making the statement. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has stated a thing as a 
property of itself: for then what has been stated to be a property 
will not be a property. For a thing itself always shows its own 
essence, and what shows the essence is not a property but a 
definition. Thus (e.g.) he who has said that ‘becoming’ is a 
property of ‘beautiful’ has rendered the term as a property of 
itself (for ‘beautiful’ and ‘becoming’ are the same); and so 
‘becoming’ could not be a property of ‘beautiful’. For 
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he has avoided 
rendering a thing as a property of itself, but has yet stated a 
convertible predicate: for then what is stated not to be a 
property will be a property. Thus he who has stated ‘animate 
substance’ as a property of ‘living-creature’ has not stated 
‘living-creature’ as a property of itself, but has rendered a 
convertible predicate, so that ‘animate substance’ would be a 
property of ‘living-creature’. 

Next, in the case of things consisting of like parts, you should 
look and see, for destructive purposes, if the property of the 
whole be not true of the part, or if that of the part be not 
predicated of the whole: for then what has been stated to be the 
property will not be a property. In some cases it happens that 
this is so: for sometimes in rendering a property in the case of 


things that consist of like parts a man may have his eye on the 
whole, while sometimes he may address himself to what is 
predicated of the part: and then in neither case will it have been 
rightly rendered. Take an instance referring to the whole: the 
man who has said that it is a property of the ‘sea’ to be ‘the 
largest volume of salt water’, has stated the property of 
something that consists of like parts, but has rendered an 
attribute of such a kind as is not true of the part (for a particular 
sea is not ‘the largest volume of salt water’); and so the largest 
volume of salt water’ could not be a property of the ‘sea’. Now 
take one referring to the part: the man who has stated that it is 
a property of ‘air’ to be ‘breathable’ has stated the property of 
something that consists of like parts, but he has stated an 
attribute such as, though true of some air, is still not predicable 
of the whole (for the whole of the air is not breathable); and so 
‘breathable’ could not be a property of ‘air’. For constructive 
purposes, on the other hand, see whether, while it is true of 
each of the things with similar parts, it is on the other hand a 
property of them taken as a collective whole: for then what has 
been stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) 
while it is true of earth everywhere that it naturally falls 
downwards, it is a property of the various particular pieces of 
earth taken as ‘the Earth’, so that it would be a property of 
‘earth’ ‘naturally to fall downwards’. 

Next, look from the point of view of the respective opposites, 
and first (a) from that of the contraries, and see, for destructive 
purposes, if the contrary of the term rendered fails to be a 
property of the contrary subject. For then neither will the 
contrary of the first be a property of the contrary of the second. 


Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as injustice is contrary to justice, and the 
lowest evil to the highest good, but ‘to be the highest good’ is 
not a property of ‘justice’, therefore ‘to be the lowest evil’ could 
not be a property of ‘injustice’. For constructive purposes, on the 
other hand, see if the contrary is the property of the contrary: 
for then also the contrary of the first will be the property of the 
contrary of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as evil is contrary 
to good, and objectionable to desirable, and ‘desirable’ is a 
property of ‘good’, ‘objectionable’ would be a property of ‘evil’. 

Secondly (h) look from the point of view of relative opposites 
and see, for destructive purposes, if the correlative of the term 
rendered fails to be a property of the correlative of the subject: 
for then neither will the correlative of the first be a property of 
the correlative of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘double’ is 
relative to ‘half’, and ‘in excess’ to ‘exceeded’, while ‘in excess’ 
is not a property of ‘double’, exceeded’ could not be a property 
of ‘half’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the 
correlative of the alleged property is a property of the subject’s 
correlative: for then also the correlative of the first will be a 
property of the correlative of the second: e.g. inasmuch as 
‘double’ is relative to ‘half’, and the proportion 1:2 is relative to 
the proportion 2:1, while it is a property of ‘double’ to be ‘in the 
proportion of 2 to 1’, it would be a property of ‘half’ to be ‘in the 
proportion of 1 to 2’. 

Thirdly (c) for destructive purposes, see if an attribute described 
in terms of a state (X) fails to be a property of the given state (Y): 
for then neither will the attribute described in terms of the 
privation (of X) be a property of the privation (of Y). Also if, on 
the other hand, an attribute described in terms of the privation 
(of X) be not a property of the given privation (of Y), neither will 
the attribute described in terms of the state (X) be a property of 
the state (Y). Thus, for example, inasmuch as it is not predicated 
as a property of ‘deafness’ to be a ‘lack of sensation’, neither 


could it be a property of ‘hearing’ to be a ‘sensation’. For 
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if an attribute 
described in terms of a state (X) is a property of the given state 
(Y): for then also the attribute that is described in terms of the 
privation (of X) will be a property of the privation (of Y). Also, if 
an attribute described in terms of a privation (of X) be a 
property of the privation (of Y), then also the attribute that is 
described in terms of the state (X) will be a property of the state 
(Y). Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘to see’ is a property of ‘sight’, 
inasmuch as we have sight, ‘failure to see’ would be a property 
of ‘blindness’, inasmuch as we have not got the sight we should 
naturally have. 

Next, look from the point of view of positive and negative terms; 
and first (a) from the point of view of the predicates taken by 
themselves. This common-place rule is useful only for a 
destructive purpose. Thus (e.g.) see if the positive term or the 
attribute described in terms of it is a property of the subject: for 
then the negative term or the attribute described in terms of it 
will not be a property of the subject. Also if, on the other hand, 
the negative term or the attribute described in terms of it is a 
property of the subject, then the positive term or the attribute 
described in terms of it will not be a property of the subject: e.g. 
inasmuch as ‘animate’ is a property of ‘living creature’, 
‘inanimate’ could not be a property of ‘living creature’. 

Secondly (b) look from the point of view of the predicates, 
positive or negative, and their respective subjects; and see, for 
destructive purposes, if the positive term falls to be a property 
of the positive subject: for then neither will the negative term 
be a property of the negative subject. Also, if the negative term 
fails to be a property of the negative subject, neither will the 
positive term be a property of the positive subject. Thus (e.g.) 
inasmuch as ‘animal’ is not a property of ‘man’, neither could 
‘not-animal’ be a property of ‘not-man’. Also if ‘not-animal’ 


seems not to be a property of ‘not-man’, neither will ‘animal’ be 
a property of ‘man’. For constructive purposes, on the other 
hand, see if the positive term is a property of the positive 
subject: for then the negative term will be a property of the 
negative subject as well. Also if the negative term be a property 
of the negative subject, the positive will be a property of the 
positive as well. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is a property of ‘notliving 
being’ ‘not to live’, it would be a property of ‘living being’ 
‘to live’: also if it seems to be a property of ‘living being’ ‘to live’, 
it will also seem to be a property of ‘not-living being’ ‘not to 
live’. 

Thirdly (c) look from the point of view of the subjects taken by 
themselves, and see, for destructive purposes, if the property 
rendered is a property of the positive subject: for then the same 
term will not be a property of the negative subject as well. Also, 
if the term rendered be a property of the negative subject, it will 
not be a property of the positive. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 
‘animate’ is a property of ‘living creature’, ‘animate’ could not 
be a property of ‘not-living creature’. For constructive purposes, 
on the other hand, if the term rendered fails to be a property of 
the affirmative subject it would be a property of the negative. 
This commonplace rule is, however, deceptive: for a positive 
term is not a property of a negative, or a negative of a positive. 
For a positive term does not belong at all to a negative, while a 
negative term, though it belongs to a positive, does not belong 
as a property. 

Next, look from the point of view of the coordinate members of 
a division, and see, for destructive purposes, if none of the coordinate 
members (parallel with the property rendered) be a 
property of any of the remaining set of co-ordinate members 
(parallel with the subject): for then neither will the term stated 
be a property of that of which it is stated to be a property. Thus 
(e.g.) inasmuch as ‘sensible living being’ is not a property of any 


of the other living beings, ‘intelligible living being’ could not be 
a property of God. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, 
see if some one or other of the remaining co-ordinate members 
(parallel with the property rendered) be a property of each of 
these co-ordinate members (parallel with the subject): for then 
the remaining one too will be a property of that of which it has 
been stated not to be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is a 
property of ‘wisdom’ to be essentially ‘the natural virtue of the 
rational faculty’, then, taking each of the other virtues as well in 
this way, it would be a property of ‘temperance’ to be essentially 
‘the natural virtue of the faculty of desire’. 

Next, look from the point of view of the inflexions, and see, for 
destructive purposes, if the inflexion of the property rendered 
fails to be a property of the inflexion of the subject: for then 
neither will the other inflexion be a property of the other 
inflexion. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘beautifully’ is not a property 
of ‘justly’, neither could ‘beautiful’ be a property of ‘just’. For 
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the inflexion of 
the property rendered is a property of the inflexion of the 
subject: for then also the other inflexion will be a property of 
the other inflexion. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘walking biped’ is a 
property of man, it would also be any one’s property ‘as a man’ 
to be described ‘as a walking biped’. Not only in the case of the 
actual term mentioned should one look at the inflexions, but 
also in the case of its opposites, just as has been laid down in 
the case of the former commonplace rules as well.’ Thus, for 
destructive purposes, see if the inflexion of the opposite of the 
property rendered fails to be the property of the inflexion of the 
opposite of the subject: for then neither will the inflexion of the 
other opposite be a property of the inflexion of the other 
opposite. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘well’ is not a property of 
‘justly’, neither could ‘badly’ be a property of ‘unjustly’. For 
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the inflexion of 
the opposite of the property originally suggested is a property of 


the inflexion of the opposite of the original subject: for then 
also the inflexion of the other opposite will be a property of the 
inflexion of the other opposite. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘best’ is 
a property of ‘the good’, ‘worst’ also will be a property of ‘the 
evil’. 

Next, look from the point of view of things that are in a like 
relation, and see, for destructive purposes, if what is in a 
relation like that of the property rendered fails to be a property 
of what is in a relation like that of the subject: for then neither 
will what is in a relation like that of the first be a property of 
what is in a relation like that of the second. Thus (e.g.) 
inasmuch as the relation of the builder towards the production 
of a house is like that of the doctor towards the production of 
health, and it is not a property of a doctor to produce health, it 
could not be a property of a builder to produce a house. For 
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if what is in a 
relation like that of the property rendered is a property of what 
is in a relation like that of the subject: for then also what is in a 
relation like that of the first will be a property of what is in a 
relation like that of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as the 
relation of a doctor towards the possession of ability to produce 
health is like that of a trainer towards the possession of ability 
to produce vigour, and it is a property of a trainer to possess the 
ability to produce vigour, it would be a property of a doctor to 
possess the ability to produce health. 

Next look from the point of view of things that are identically 
related, and see, for destructive purposes, if the predicate that is 
identically related towards two subjects fails to be a property of 


the subject which is identically related to it as the subject in 
question; for then neither will the predicate that is identically 
related to both subjects be a property of the subject which is 
identically related to it as the first. If, on the other hand, the 
predicate which is identically related to two subjects is the 
property of the subject which is identically related to it as the 
subject in question, then it will not be a property of that of 
which it has been stated to be a property. (e.g.) inasmuch as 
prudence is identically related to both the noble and the base, 
since it is knowledge of each of them, and it is not a property of 
prudence to be knowledge of the noble, it could not be a 
property of prudence to be knowledge of the base. If, on the 
other hand, it is a property of prudence to be the knowledge of 
the noble, it could not be a property of it to be the knowledge of 
the base.] For it is impossible for the same thing to be a property 
of more than one subject. For constructive purposes, on the 
other hand, this commonplace rule is of no use: for what is 
‘identically related’ is a single predicate in process of 
comparison with more than one subject. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the predicate qualified by 
the verb ‘to be’ fails to be a property of the subject qualified by 
the verb ‘to be’: for then neither will the destruction of the one 
be a property of the other qualified by the verb ‘to be destroyed’, 
nor will the ‘becoming’the one be a property of the other 
qualified by the verb ‘to become’. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is 
not a property of ‘man’ to be an animal, neither could it be a 
property of becoming a man to become an animal; nor could 
the destruction of an animal be a property of the destruction of 
a man. In the same way one should derive arguments also from 
‘becoming’ to ‘being’ and ‘being destroyed’, and from ‘being 
destroyed’ to ‘being’ and to ‘becoming’ exactly as they have just 
been given from ‘being’ to ‘becoming’ and ‘being destroyed’. For 
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the subject set 
down as qualified by the verb ‘to be’ has the predicate set down 


as so qualified, as its property: for then also the subject 
qualified by the very ‘to become’ will have the predicate 
qualified by ‘to become’ as its property, and the subject 
qualified by the verb to be destroyed’ will have as its property 
the predicate rendered with this qualification. Thus, for 
example, inasmuch as it is a property of man to be a mortal, it 
would be a property of becoming a man to become a mortal, 
and the destruction of a mortal would be a property of the 
destruction of a man. In the same way one should derive 
arguments also from ‘becoming’ and ‘being destroyed’ both to 
‘being’ and to the conclusions that follow from them, exactly as 
was directed also for the purpose of destruction. 

Next take a look at the ‘idea’ of the subject stated, and see, for 
destructive purposes, if the suggested property fails to belong to 
the ‘idea’ in question, or fails to belong to it in virtue of that 
character which causes it to bear the description of which the 
property was rendered: for then what has been stated to be a 
property will not be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘being 
motionless’ does not belong to ‘man-himself’ qua ‘man’, but 
qua ‘idea’, it could not be a property of ‘man’ to be motionless. 
For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the property 
in question belongs to the idea, and belongs to it in that respect 
in virtue of which there is predicated of it that character of 
which the predicate in question has been stated not to be a 
property: for then what has been stated not to be a property will 
be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it belongs to ‘livingcreature-
itself’ to be compounded of soul and body, and further 
this belongs to it qua ‘living-creature’, it would be a property of 
‘living-creature’ to be compounded of soul and body. 


Next look from the point of view of greater and less degrees, 
and first (a) for destructive purposes, see if what is more-P fails 
to be a property of what is more-S: for then neither will what is 
less-P be a property of what is less-S, nor least-P of least-S, nor 
most-P of most-S, nor P simply of S simply. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch 
as being more highly coloured is not a property of what is more 
a body, neither could being less highly coloured be a property of 
what is less a body, nor being coloured be a property of body at 
all. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if what is 
more-P is a property of what is more-S: for then also what is 
less-P will be a property of what is less S, and least-P of least-S, 
and most-P of most-S, and P simply of S simply. Thus (e.g.) 
inasmuch as a higher degree of sensation is a property of a 
higher degree of life, a lower degree of sensation also would be a 
property of a lower degree of life, and the highest of the highest 
and the lowest of the lowest degree, and sensation simply of life 
simply. 

Also you should look at the argument from a simple predication 
to the same qualified types of predication, and see, for 
destructive purposes, if P simply fails to be a property of S 
simply; for then neither will more-P be a property of more-S, 
nor less-P of less-S, nor most-P of most-S, nor least-P of least-S. 
Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘virtuous’ is not a property of ‘man’, 
neither could ‘more virtuous’ be a property of what is ‘more 
human’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if P 
simply is a property of S simply: for then more P also will be a 
property of more-S, and less-P of less-S, and least-P of least-S, 
and most-P of most-S. Thus (e.g.) a tendency to move upwards 
by nature is a property of fire, and so also a greater tendency to 
move upwards by nature would be a property of what is more 
fiery. In the same way too one should look at all these matters 
from the point of view of the others as well. 


Secondly (b) for destructive purposes, see if the more likely 
property fails to be a property of the more likely subject: for 
then neither will the less likely property be a property of the 
less likely subject. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘perceiving’ is more 
likely to be a property of ‘animal’ than ‘knowing’ of ‘man’, and 
‘perceiving’ is not a property of ‘animal’, ‘knowing’ could not be 
a property of ‘man’. For constructive purposes, on the other 
hand, see if the less likely property is a property of the less 
likely subject; for then too the more likely property will be a 
property of the more likely subject. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘to 
be naturally civilized’ is less likely to be a property of man than 
‘to live’ of an animal, and it is a property of man to be naturally 
civilized, it would be a property of animal to live. 

Thirdly (c) for destructive purposes, see if the predicate fails to 
be a property of that of which it is more likely to be a property: 
for then neither will it be a property of that of which it is less 
likely to be a property: while if it is a property of the former, it 
will not be a property of the latter. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘to be 
coloured’ is more likely to be a property of a ‘surface’ than of a 
‘body’, and it is not a property of a surface, ‘to be coloured’ 
could not be a property of ‘body’; while if it is a property of a 
‘surface’, it could not be a property of a ‘body’. For constructive 
purposes, on the other hand, this commonplace rule is not of 
any use: for it is impossible for the same thing to be a property 
of more than one thing. 

Fourthly (d) for destructive purposes, see if what is more likely 
to be a property of a given subject fails to be its property: for 
then neither will what is less likely to be a property of it be its 
property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘sensible’ is more likely than 
‘divisible’ to be a property of ‘animal’, and ‘sensible’ is not a 
property of animal, ‘divisible’ could not be a property of animal. 
For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if what is less 
likely to be a property of it is a property; for then what is more 


likely to be a property of it will be a property as well. Thus, for 
example, inasmuch as ‘sensation’ is less likely to be a property 
of ‘animal’ than life’, and ‘sensation’ is a property of animal, 
‘life’ would be a property of animal. 

Next, look from the point of view of the attributes that belong in 
a like manner, and first (a) for destructive purposes, see if what 
is as much a property fails to be a property of that of which it is 
as much a property: for then neither will that which is as much 
a property as it be a property of that of which it is as much a 
property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘desiring’ is as much a 
property of the faculty of desire as reasoning’ is a property of 
the faculty of reason, and desiring is not a property of the 
faculty of desire, reasoning could not be a property of the 
faculty of reason. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, 
see if what is as much a property is a property of that of which 
it is as much a property: for then also what is as much a 
property as it will be a property of that of which it is as much a 
property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is as much a property of ‘the 
faculty of reason’ to be ‘the primary seat of wisdom’ as it is of 
‘the faculty of desire’ to be ‘the primary seat of temperance’, 
and it is a property of the faculty of reason to be the primary 
seat of wisdom, it would be a property of the faculty of desire to 
be the primary seat of temperance. 

Secondly (b) for destructive purposes, see if what is as much a 
property of anything fails to be a property of it: for then neither 
will what is as much a property be a property of it. Thus (e.g.) 
inasmuch as ‘seeing’ is as much a property of man as ‘hearing’, 
and ‘seeing’ is not a property of man, ‘hearing’ could not be a 
property of man. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, 
see if what is as much a property of it is its property: for then 
what is as much a property of it as the former will be its 
property as well. Thus (e.g.) it is as much a property of the soul 
to be the primary possessor of a part that desires as of a part 


that reasons, and it is a property of the soul to be the primary 
possessor of a part that desires, and so it be a property of the 
soul to be the primary possessor of a part that reasons. 

Thirdly (c) for destructive purposes, see if it fails to be a 
property of that of which it is as much a property: for then 
neither will it be a property of that of which it is as much a 
property as of the former, while if it be a property of the former, 
it will not be a property of the other. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘to 
burn’ is as much a property of ‘flame’ as of ‘live coals’, and ‘to 
burn’ is not a property of flame, ‘to burn’ could not be a 
property of live coals: while if it is a property of flame, it could 
not be a property of live coals. For constructive purposes, on the 
other hand, this commonplace rule is of no use. 

The rule based on things that are in a like relation’ differs from 
the rule based on attributes that belong in a like manner,’ 
because the former point is secured by analogy, not from 
reflection on the belonging of any attribute, while the latter is 
judged by a comparison based on the fact that an attribute 
belongs. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if in rendering the property 
potentially, he has also through that potentiality rendered the 
property relatively to something that does not exist, when the 
potentiality in question cannot belong to what does not exist: 
for then what is stated to be a property will not be a property. 
Thus (e.g.) he who has said that ‘breathable’ is a property of ‘air’ 
has, on the one hand, rendered the property potentially (for that 
is ‘breathable’ which is such as can be breathed), and on the 
other hand has also rendered the property relatively to what 
does not exist: – for while air may exist, even though there exist 
no animal so constituted as to breathe the air, it is not possible 
to breathe it if no animal exist: so that it will not, either, be a 
property of air to be such as can be breathed at a time when 


there exists no animal such as to breathe it and so it follows 
that ‘breathable’ could not be a property of air. 

For constructive purposes, see if in rendering the property 
potentially he renders the property either relatively to 
something that exists, or to something that does not exist, 
when the potentiality in question can belong to what does not 
exist: for then what has been stated not to be a property will be 
a property. Thus e.g.) he who renders it as a property of ‘being’ 
to be ‘capable of being acted upon or of acting’, in rendering the 
property potentially, has rendered the property relatively to 
something that exists: for when ‘being’ exists, it will also be 
capable of being acted upon or of acting in a certain way: so 
that to be ‘capable of being acted upon or of acting’ would be a 
property of ‘being’. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has stated the property 
in the superlative: for then what has been stated to be a 
property will not be a property. For people who render the 
property in that way find that of the object of which the 
description is true, the name is not true as well: for though the 
object perish the description will continue in being none the 
less; for it belongs most nearly to something that is in being. An 
example would be supposing any one were to render ‘the 
lightest body’ as a property of ‘fire’: for, though fire perish, there 
eh re will still be some form of body that is the lightest, so that 
‘the lightest body’ could not be a property of fire. For 
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he has avoided 
rendering the property in the superlative: for then the property 
will in this respect have been property of man has not rendered 
the property correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as he in the 
superlative, the property would in who states ‘a naturally 
civilized animal’ as a this respect have been correctly stated. 


Book VI 


The discussion of Definitions falls into five parts. For you have 
to show either (1) that it is not true at all to apply the expression 
as well to that to which the term is applied (for the definition of 
Man ought to be true of every man); or (2) that though the object 
has a genus, he has failed to put the object defined into the 
genus, or to put it into the appropriate genus (for the framer of a 
definition should first place the object in its genus, and then 
append its differences: for of all the elements of the definition 
the genus is usually supposed to be the principal mark of the 
essence of what is defined): or (3) that the expression is not 
peculiar to the object (for, as we said above as well, a definition 
ought to be peculiar): or else (4) see if, though he has observed 
all the aforesaid cautions, he has yet failed to define the object, 
that is, to express its essence. (5) It remains, apart from the 
foregoing, to see if he has defined it, but defined it incorrectly. 

Whether, then, the expression be not also true of that of which 
the term is true you should proceed to examine according to the 
commonplace rules that relate to Accident. For there too the 
question is always ‘Is so and so true or untrue?’: for whenever 
we argue that an accident belongs, we declare it to be true, 
while whenever we argue that it does not belong, we declare it 
to be untrue. If, again, he has failed to place the object in the 
appropriate genus, or if the expression be not peculiar to the 


object, we must go on to examine the case according to the 
commonplace rules that relate to genus and property. 

It remains, then, to prescribe how to investigate whether the 
object has been either not defined at all, or else defined 
incorrectly. First, then, we must proceed to examine if it has 
been defined incorrectly: for with anything it is easier to do it 
than to do it correctly. Clearly, then, more mistakes are made in 
the latter task on account of its greater difficulty. Accordingly 
the attack becomes easier in the latter case than in the former. 

Incorrectness falls into two branches: (1) first, the use of obscure 
language (for the language of a definition ought to be the very 
clearest possible, seeing that the whole purpose of rendering it 
is to make something known); (secondly, if the expression used 
be longer than is necessary: for all additional matter in a 
definition is superfluous. Again, each of the aforesaid branches 
is divided into a number of others. 

One commonplace rule, then, in regard to obscurity is, See if the 
meaning intended by the definition involves an ambiguity with 
any other, e.g. ‘Becoming is a passage into being’, or ‘Health is 
the balance of hot and cold elements’. Here ‘passage’ and 
‘balance’ are ambiguous terms: it is accordingly not clear which 
of the several possible senses of the term he intends to convey. 
Likewise also, if the term defined be used in different senses 
and he has spoken without distinguishing between them: for 
then it is not clear to which of them the definition rendered 
applies, and one can then bring a captious objection on the 
ground that the definition does not apply to all the things 
whose definition he has rendered: and this kind of thing is 


particularly easy in the case where the definer does not see the 
ambiguity of his terms. Or, again, the questioner may himself 
distinguish the various senses of the term rendered in the 
definition, and then institute his argument against each: for if 
the expression used be not adequate to the subject in any of its 
senses, it is clear that he cannot have defined it in any sense 
aright. 

Another rule is, See if he has used a metaphorical expression, 
as, for instance, if he has defined knowledge as 
‘unsupplantable’, or the earth as a ‘nurse’, or temperance as a 
‘harmony’. For a metaphorical expression is always obscure. It is 
possible, also, to argue sophistically against the user of a 
metaphorical expression as though he had used it in its literal 
sense: for the definition stated will not apply to the term 
defined, e.g. in the case of temperance: for harmony is always 
found between notes. Moreover, if harmony be the genus of 
temperance, then the same object will occur in two genera of 
which neither contains the other: for harmony does not contain 
virtue, nor virtue harmony. Again, see if he uses terms that are 
unfamiliar, as when Plato describes the eye as ‘brow-shaded’, or 
a certain spider as poison-fanged’, or the marrow as 
‘boneformed’. For an unusual phrase is always obscure. 

Sometimes a phrase is used neither ambiguously, nor yet 
metaphorically, nor yet literally, as when the law is said to be 
the ‘measure’ or ‘image’ of the things that are by nature just. 
Such phrases are worse than metaphor; for the latter does make 
its meaning to some extent clear because of the likeness 
involved; for those who use metaphors do so always in view of 
some likeness: whereas this kind of phrase makes nothing 
clear; for there is no likeness to justify the description ‘measure’ 
or ‘image’, as applied to the law, nor is the law ordinarily so 
called in a literal sense. So then, if a man says that the law is 
literally a ‘measure’ or an ‘image’, he speaks falsely: for an 


image is something produced by imitation, and this is not found 
in the case of the law. If, on the other hand, he does not mean 
the term literally, it is clear that he has used an unclear 
expression, and one that is worse than any sort of metaphorical 
expression. 

Moreover, see if from the expression used the definition of the 
contrary be not clear; for definitions that have been correctly 
rendered also indicate their contraries as well. Or, again, see if, 
when it is merely stated by itself, it is not evident what it 
defines: just as in the works of the old painters, unless there 
were an inscription, the figures used to be unrecognizable. 

If, then, the definition be not clear, you should proceed to 
examine on lines such as these. If, on the other hand, he has 
phrased the definition redundantly, first of all look and see 
whether he has used any attribute that belongs universally, 
either to real objects in general, or to all that fall under the 
same genus as the object defined: for the mention of this is sure 
to be redundant. For the genus ought to divide the object from 
things in general, and the differentia from any of the things 
contained in the same genus. Now any term that belongs to 
everything separates off the given object from absolutely 
nothing, while any that belongs to all the things that fall under 
the same genus does not separate it off from the things 
contained in the same genus. Any addition, then, of that kind 
will be pointless. 

Or see if, though the additional matter may be peculiar to the 
given term, yet even when it is struck out the rest of the 
expression too is peculiar and makes clear the essence of the 


term. Thus, in the definition of man, the addition ‘capable of 
receiving knowledge’ is superfluous; for strike it out, and still 
the expression is peculiar and makes clear his essence. 
Speaking generally, everything is superfluous upon whose 
removal the remainder still makes the term that is being 
defined clear. Such, for instance, would also be the definition of 
the soul, assuming it to be stated as a ‘self-moving number’; for 
the soul is just ‘the self-moving’, as Plato defined it. Or perhaps 
the expression used, though appropriate, yet does not declare 
the essence, if the word ‘number’ be eliminated. Which of the 
two is the real state of the case it is difficult to determine 
clearly: the right way to treat the matter in all cases is to be 
guided by convenience. Thus (e.g.) it is said that the definition of 
phlegm is the ‘undigested moisture that comes first off food’. 
Here the addition of the word ‘undigested’ is superfluous, 
seeing that ‘the first’ is one and not many, so that even when 
undigested’ is left out the definition will still be peculiar to the 
subject: for it is impossible that both phlegm and also 
something else should both be the first to arise from the food. 
Or perhaps the phlegm is not absolutely the first thing to come 
off the food, but only the first of the undigested matters, so that 
the addition ‘undigested’ is required; for stated the other way 
the definition would not be true unless the phlegm comes first 
of all. 

Moreover, see if anything contained in the definition fails to 
apply to everything that falls under the same species: for this 
sort of definition is worse than those which include an attribute 
belonging to all things universally. For in that case, if the 
remainder of the expression be peculiar, the whole too will be 
peculiar: for absolutely always, if to something peculiar 
anything whatever that is true be added, the whole too becomes 
peculiar. Whereas if any part of the expression do not apply to 
everything that falls under the same species, it is impossible 
that the expression as a whole should be peculiar: for it will not 


be predicated convertibly with the object; e.g. ‘a walking biped 
animal six feet high’: for an expression of that kind is not 
predicated convertibly with the term, because the attribute ‘six 
feet high’ does not belong to everything that falls under the 
same species. 

Again, see if he has said the same thing more than once, saying 
(e.g.) ‘desire’ is a ‘conation for the pleasant’. For ‘desire’ is 
always ‘for the pleasant’, so that what is the same as desire will 
also be ‘for the pleasant’. Accordingly our definition of desire 
becomes ‘conation-for-the-pleasant’: for the word ‘desire’ is the 
exact equivalent of the words ‘conation-for-the-pleasant’, so 
that both alike will be ‘for the pleasant’. Or perhaps there is no 
absurdity in this; for consider this instance: ‘Man is a biped’: 
therefore, what is the same as man is a biped: but ‘a walking 
biped animal’ is the same as man, and therefore walking biped 
animal is a biped’. But this involves no real absurdity. For ‘biped’ 
is not a predicate of ‘walking animal’: if it were, then we should 
certainly have ‘biped’ predicated twice of the same thing; but as 
a matter of fact the subject said to be a biped is’a walking biped 
animal’, so that the word ‘biped’ is only used as a predicate 
once. Likewise also in the case of ‘desire’ as well: for it is not 
‘conation’ that is said to be ‘for the pleasant’, but rather the 
whole idea, so that there too the predication is only made once. 
Absurdity results, not when the same word is uttered twice, but 
when the same thing is more than once predicated of a subject; 

e.g. if he says, like Xenocrates, that wisdom defines and 
contemplates reality:’ for definition is a certain type of 
contemplation, so that by adding the words ‘and contemplates’ 
over again he says the same thing twice over. Likewise, too, 
those fail who say that ‘cooling’ is ‘the privation of natural heat’. 
For all privation is a privation of some natural attribute, so that 
the addition of the word ‘natural’ is superfluous: it would have 
been enough to say ‘privation of heat’, for the word ‘privation’ 
shows of itself that the heat meant is natural heat. 

Again, see if a universal have been mentioned and then a 
particular case of it be added as well, e.g. ‘Equity is a remission 
of what is expedient and just’; for what is just is a branch of 
what is expedient and is therefore included in the latter term: 
its mention is therefore redundant, an addition of the particular 
after the universal has been already stated. So also, if he defines 
‘medicine’ as ‘knowledge of what makes for health in animals 
and men’, or ‘the law’ as ‘the image of what is by nature noble 
and just’; for what is just is a branch of what is noble, so that he 
says the same thing more than once. 

Whether, then, a man defines a thing correctly or incorrectly 
you should proceed to examine on these and similar lines. But 
whether he has mentioned and defined its essence or no, 
should be examined as follows: First of all, see if he has failed to 
make the definition through terms that are prior and more 
intelligible. For the reason why the definition is rendered is to 
make known the term stated, and we make things known by 
taking not any random terms, but such as are prior and more 
intelligible, as is done in demonstrations (for so it is with all 
teaching and learning); accordingly, it is clear that a man who 
does not define through terms of this kind has not defined at 
all. Otherwise, there will be more than one definition of the 
same thing: for clearly he who defines through terms that are 
prior and more intelligible has also framed a definition, and a 
better one, so that both would then be definitions of the same 
object. This sort of view, however, does not generally find 
acceptance: for of each real object the essence is single: if, then, 
there are to be a number of definitions of the same thing, the 
essence of the object will be the same as it is represented to be 


in each of the definitions, and these representations are not the 
same, inasmuch as the definitions are different. Clearly, then, 
any one who has not defined a thing through terms that are 
prior and more intelligible has not defined it at all. 

The statement that a definition has not been made through 
more intelligible terms may be understood in two senses, either 
supposing that its terms are absolutely less intelligible, or 
supposing that they are less intelligible to us: for either sense is 
possible. Thus absolutely the prior is more intelligible than the 
posterior, a point, for instance, than a line, a line than a plane, 
and a plane than a solid; just as also a unit is more intelligible 
than a number; for it is the prius and starting-point of all 
number. Likewise, also, a letter is more intelligible than a 
syllable. Whereas to us it sometimes happens that the converse 
is the case: for the solid falls under perception most of all – 
more than a plane – and a plane more than a line, and a line 
more than a point; for most people learn things like the former 
earlier than the latter; for any ordinary intelligence can grasp 
them, whereas the others require an exact and exceptional 
understanding. 

Absolutely, then, it is better to try to make what is posterior 
known through what is prior, inasmuch as such a way of 
procedure is more scientific. Of course, in dealing with persons 
who cannot recognize things through terms of that kind, it may 
perhaps be necessary to frame the expression through terms 
that are intelligible to them. Among definitions of this kind are 
those of a point, a line, and a plane, all of which explain the 
prior by the posterior; for they say that a point is the limit of a 
line, a line of a plane, a plane of a solid. One must, however, not 
fail to observe that those who define in this way cannot show 
the essential nature of the term they define, unless it so 
happens that the same thing is more intelligible both to us and 
also absolutely, since a correct definition must define a thing 


through its genus and its differentiae, and these belong to the 
order of things which are absolutely more intelligible than, and 
prior to, the species. For annul the genus and differentia, and 
the species too is annulled, so that these are prior to the 
species. They are also more intelligible; for if the species be 
known, the genus and differentia must of necessity be known 
as well (for any one who knows what a man is knows also what 
‘animal’ and ‘walking’ are), whereas if the genus or the 
differentia be known it does not follow of necessity that the 
species is known as well: thus the species is less intelligible. 
Moreover, those who say that such definitions, viz. those which 
proceed from what is intelligible to this, that, or the other man, 
are really and truly definitions, will have to say that there are 
several definitions of one and the same thing. For, as it happens, 
different things are more intelligible to different people, not the 
same things to all; and so a different definition would have to 
be rendered to each several person, if the definition is to be 
constructed from what is more intelligible to particular 
individuals. Moreover, to the same people different things are 
more intelligible at different times; first of all the objects of 
sense; then, as they become more sharpwitted, the converse; so 
that those who hold that a definition ought to be rendered 
through what is more intelligible to particular individuals would 
not have to render the same definition at all times even to the 
same person. It is clear, then, that the right way to define is not 
through terms of that kind, but through what is absolutely more 
intelligible: for only in this way could the definition come 
always to be one and the same. Perhaps, also, what is absolutely 
intelligible is what is intelligible, not to all, but to those who are 
in a sound state of understanding, just as what is absolutely 
healthy is what is healthy to those in a sound state of body. All 
such points as this ought to be made very precise, and made 
use of in the course of discussion as occasion requires. The 
demolition of a definition will most surely win a general 


approval if the definer happens to have framed his expression 
neither from what is absolutely more intelligible nor yet from 
what is so to us. 

One form, then, of the failure to work through more intelligible 
terms is the exhibition of the prior through the posterior, as we 
remarked before.’ Another form occurs if we find that the 
definition has been rendered of what is at rest and definite 
through what is indefinite and in motion: for what is still and 
definite is prior to what is indefinite and in motion. 

Of the failure to use terms that are prior there are three forms: 

(1) The first is when an opposite has been defined through its 
opposite, e.g.i. good through evil: for opposites are always 
simultaneous by nature. Some people think, also, that both are 
objects of the same science, so that the one is not even more 
intelligible than the other. One must, however, observe that it is 
perhaps not possible to define some things in any other way, 
e.g. the double without the half, and all the terms that are 
essentially relative: for in all such cases the essential being is 
the same as a certain relation to something, so that it is 
impossible to understand the one term without the other, and 
accordingly in the definition of the one the other too must be 
embraced. One ought to learn up all such points as these, and 
use them as occasion may seem to require. 
(2) Another is – if he has used the term defined itself. This 
passes unobserved when the actual name of the object is not 
used, e.g. supposing any one had defined the sun as a star that 
appears by day’. For in bringing in ‘day’ he brings in the sun. To 
detect errors of this sort, exchange the word for its definition, 
e.g. the definition of ‘day’ as the ‘passage of the sun over the 
earth’. Clearly, whoever has said ‘the passage of the sun over 
the earth’ has said ‘the sun’, so that in bringing in the ‘day’ he 
has brought in the sun. 

(3) Again, see if he has defined one coordinate member of a 
division by another, e.g. ‘an odd number’ as ‘that which is 
greater by one than an even number’. For the co-ordinate 
members of a division that are derived from the same genus are 
simultaneous by nature and ‘odd’ and ‘even’ are such terms: for 
both are differentiae of number. 
Likewise also, see if he has defined a superior through a 
subordinate term, e.g. ‘An «even number» is «a number divisible 
into halves»‘, or ‘«the good» is a «state of virtue» ‘. For ‘half’ is 
derived from ‘two’, and ‘two’ is an even number: virtue also is a 
kind of good, so that the latter terms are subordinate to the 
former. Moreover, in using the subordinate term one is bound to 
use the other as well: for whoever employs the term ‘virtue’ 
employs the term ‘good’, seeing that virtue is a certain kind of 
good: likewise, also, whoever employs the term ‘half’ employs 
the term ‘even’, for to be ‘divided in half’ means to be divided 
into two, and two is even. 

Generally speaking, then, one commonplace rule relates to the 
failure to frame the expression by means of terms that are prior 
and more intelligible: and of this the subdivisions are those 
specified above. A second is, see whether, though the object is in 
a genus, it has not been placed in a genus. This sort of error is 
always found where the essence of the object does not stand 
first in the expression, e.g. the definition of ‘body’ as ‘that which 
has three dimensions’, or the definition of ‘man’, supposing any 
one to give it, as ‘that which knows how to count’: for it is not 
stated what it is that has three dimensions, or what it is that 


knows how to count: whereas the genus is meant to indicate 
just this, and is submitted first of the terms in the definition. 

Moreover, see if, while the term to be defined is used in relation 
to many things, he has failed to render it in relation to all of 
them; as (e.g.) if he define ‘grammar’ as the ‘knowledge how to 
write from dictation’: for he ought also to say that it is a 
knowledge how to read as well. For in rendering it as 
‘knowledge of writing’ has no more defined it than by rendering 
it as ‘knowledge of reading’: neither in fact has succeeded, but 
only he who mentions both these things, since it is impossible 
that there should be more than one definition of the same 
thing. It is only, however, in some cases that what has been said 
corresponds to the actual state of things: in some it does not, 

e.g. all those terms which are not used essentially in relation to 
both things: as medicine is said to deal with the production of 
disease and health; for it is said essentially to do the latter, but 
the former only by accident: for it is absolutely alien to 
medicine to produce disease. Here, then, the man who renders 
medicine as relative to both of these things has not defined it 
any better than he who mentions the one only. In fact he has 
done it perhaps worse, for any one else besides the doctor is 
capable of producing disease. 
Moreover, in a case where the term to be defined is used in 
relation to several things, see if he has rendered it as relative to 
the worse rather than to the better; for every form of knowledge 
and potentiality is generally thought to be relative to the best. 

Again, if the thing in question be not placed in its own proper 
genus, one must examine it according to the elementary rules 
in regard to genera, as has been said before.’ 

Moreover, see if he uses language which transgresses the genera 
of the things he defines, defining, e.g. justice as a ‘state that 
produces equality’ or ‘distributes what is equal’: for by defining 


it so he passes outside the sphere of virtue, and so by leaving 
out the genus of justice he fails to express its essence: for the 
essence of a thing must in each case bring in its genus. It is the 
same thing if the object be not put into its nearest genus; for 
the man who puts it into the nearest one has stated all the 
higher genera, seeing that all the higher genera are predicated 
of the lower. Either, then, it ought to be put into its nearest 
genus, or else to the higher genus all the differentiae ought to 
be appended whereby the nearest genus is defined. For then he 
would not have left out anything: but would merely have 
mentioned the subordinate genus by an expression instead of 
by name. On the other hand, he who mentions merely the 
higher genus by itself, does not state the subordinate genus as 
well: in saying ‘plant’ a man does not specify ‘a tree’. 

Again, in regard to the differentiae, we must examine in like 
manner whether the differentiae, too, that he has stated be 
those of the genus. For if a man has not defined the object by 
the differentiae peculiar to it, or has mentioned something such 
as is utterly incapable of being a differentia of anything, e.g. 
‘animal’ or ‘substance’, clearly he has not defined it at all: for 
the aforesaid terms do not differentiate anything at all. Further, 
we must see whether the differentia stated possesses anything 
that is co-ordinate with it in a division; for, if not, clearly the 
one stated could not be a differentia of the genus. For a genus is 
always divided by differentiae that are co-ordinate members of 
a division, as, for instance, by the terms ‘walking’, ‘flying’, 
‘aquatic’, and ‘biped’. Or see if, though the contrasted differentia 
exists, it yet is not true of the genus, for then, clearly, neither of 
them could be a differentia of the genus; for differentiae that 


are co-ordinates in a division with the differentia of a thing are 
all true of the genus to which the thing belongs. Likewise, also, 
see if, though it be true, yet the addition of it to the genus fails 
to make a species. For then, clearly, this could not be a specific 
differentia of the genus: for a specific differentia, if added to the 
genus, always makes a species. If, however, this be no true 
differentia, no more is the one adduced, seeing that it is a coordinate 
member of a division with this. 

Moreover, see if he divides the genus by a negation, as those do 
who define line as ‘length without breadth’: for this means 
simply that it has not any breadth. The genus will then be found 
to partake of its own species: for, since of everything either an 
affirmation or its negation is true, length must always either 
lack breadth or possess it, so that ‘length’ as well, i.e. the genus 
of ‘line’, will be either with or without breadth. But ‘length 
without breadth’ is the definition of a species, as also is ‘length 
with breadth’: for ‘without breadth’ and ‘with breadth’ are 
differentiae, and the genus and differentia constitute the 
definition of the species. Hence the genus would admit of the 
definition of its species. Likewise, also, it will admit of the 
definition of the differentia, seeing that one or the other of the 
aforesaid differentiae is of necessity predicated of the genus. 
The usefulness of this principle is found in meeting those who 
assert the existence of ‘Ideas’: for if absolute length exist, how 
will it be predicable of the genus that it has breadth or that it 
lacks it? For one assertion or the other will have to be true of 
‘length’ universally, if it is to be true of the genus at all: and this 
is contrary to the fact: for there exist both lengths which have, 
and lengths which have not, breadth. Hence the only people 
against whom the rule can be employed are those who assert 
that a genus is always numerically one; and this is what is done 
by those who assert the real existence of the ‘Ideas’; for they 
allege that absolute length and absolute animal are the genus. 


It may be that in some cases the definer is obliged to employ a 
negation as well, e.g. in defining privations. For ‘blind’ means a 
thing which cannot see when its nature is to see. There is no 
difference between dividing the genus by a negation, and 
dividing it by such an affirmation as is bound to have a negation 
as its co-ordinate in a division, e.g. supposing he had defined 
something as ‘length possessed of breadth’; for co-ordinate in 
the division with that which is possessed of breadth is that 
which possesses no breadth and that only, so that again the 
genus is divided by a negation. 

Again, see if he rendered the species as a differentia, as do 
those who define ‘contumely’ as ‘insolence accompanied by 
jeering’; for jeering is a kind of insolence, i.e. it is a species and 
not a differentia. 

Moreover, see if he has stated the genus as the differentia, e.g. 
‘Virtue is a good or noble state: for ‘good’ is the genus of ‘virtue’. 
Or possibly ‘good’ here is not the genus but the differentia, on 
the principle that the same thing cannot be in two genera of 
which neither contains the other: for ‘good’ does not include 
‘state’, nor vice versa: for not every state is good nor every good 
a ‘state’. Both, then, could not be genera, and consequently, if 
‘state’ is the genus of virtue, clearly ‘good’ cannot be its genus: 
it must rather be the differentia’. Moreover, ‘a state’ indicates 
the essence of virtue, whereas ‘good’ indicates not the essence 
but a quality: and to indicate a quality is generally held to be 
the function of the differentia. See, further, whether the 
differentia rendered indicates an individual rather than a 
quality: for the general view is that the differentia always 
expresses a quality. 

Look and see, further, whether the differentia belongs only by 
accident to the object defined. For the differentia is never an 


accidental attribute, any more than the genus is: for the 
differentia of a thing cannot both belong and not belong to it. 

Moreover, if either the differentia or the species, or any of the 
things which are under the species, is predicable of the genus, 
then he could not have defined the term. For none of the 
aforesaid can possibly be predicated of the genus, seeing that 
the genus is the term with the widest range of all. Again, see if 
the genus be predicated of the differentia; for the general view 
is that the genus is predicated, not of the differentia, but of the 
objects of which the differentia is predicated. Animal (e.g.) is 
predicated of ‘man’ or ‘ox’ or other walking animals, not of the 
actual differentia itself which we predicate of the species. For if 
‘animal’ is to be predicated of each of its differentiae, then 
‘animal’ would be predicated of the species several times over; 
for the differentiae are predicates of the species. Moreover, the 
differentiae will be all either species or individuals, if they are 
animals; for every animal is either a species or an individual. 

Likewise you must inquire also if the species or any of the 
objects that come under it is predicated of the differentia: for 
this is impossible, seeing that the differentia is a term with a 
wider range than the various species. Moreover, if any of the 
species be predicated of it, the result will be that the differentia 
is a species: if, for instance, ‘man’ be predicated, the differentia 
is clearly the human race. Again, see if the differentia fails to be 
prior to the species: for the differentia ought to be posterior to 
the genus, but prior to the species. 

Look and see also if the differentia mentioned belongs to a 
different genus, neither contained in nor containing the genus 
in question. For the general view is that the same differentia 
cannot be used of two non-subaltern genera. Else the result will 
be that the same species as well will be in two non-subaltern 
genera: for each of the differentiae imports its own genus, e.g. 


‘walking’ and ‘biped’ import with them the genus ‘animal’. If, 
then, each of the genera as well is true of that of which the 
differentia is true, it clearly follows that the species must be in 
two non-subaltern genera. Or perhaps it is not impossible for 
the same differentia to be used of two non-subaltern genera, 
and we ought to add the words ‘except they both be subordinate 
members of the same genus’. Thus ‘walking animal’ and ‘flying 
animal’ are non-subaltern genera, and ‘biped’ is the differentia 
of both. The words ‘except they both be subordinate members of 
the same genus’ ought therefore to be added; for both these are 
subordinate to ‘animal’. From this possibility, that the same 
differentia may be used of two non-subaltern genera, it is clear 
also that there is no necessity for the differentia to carry with it 
the whole of the genus to which it belongs, but only the one or 
the other of its limbs together with the genera that are higher 
than this, as ‘biped’ carries with it either ‘flying’ or ‘walking 
animal’. 

See, too, if he has rendered ‘existence in’ something as the 
differentia of a thing’s essence: for the general view is that 
locality cannot differentiate between one essence and another. 
Hence, too, people condemn those who divide animals by 
means of the terms ‘walking’ and ‘aquatic’, on the ground that 
‘walking’ and ‘aquatic’ indicate mere locality. Or possibly in this 
case the censure is undeserved; for ‘aquatic’ does not mean ‘in’ 
anything; nor does it denote a locality, but a certain quality: for 
even if the thing be on the dry land, still it is aquatic: and 
likewise a land-animal, even though it be in the water, will still 
be a and not an aquatic-animal. But all the same, if ever the 
differentia does denote existence in something, clearly he will 
have made a bad mistake. 

Again, see if he has rendered an affection as the differentia: for 
every affection, if intensified, subverts the essence of the thing, 
while the differentia is not of that kind: for the differentia is 


generally considered rather to preserve that which it 
differentiates; and it is absolutely impossible for a thing to exist 
without its own special differentia: for if there be no ‘walking’, 
there will be no ‘man’. In fact, we may lay down absolutely that 
a thing cannot have as its differentia anything in respect of 
which it is subject to alteration: for all things of that kind, if 
intensified, destroy its essence. If, then, a man has rendered any 
differentia of this kind, he has made a mistake: for we undergo 
absolutely no alteration in respect of our differentiae. 

Again, see if he has failed to render the differentia of a relative 
term relatively to something else; for the differentiae of relative 
terms are themselves relative, as in the case also of knowledge. 
This is classed as speculative, practical and productive; and 
each of these denotes a relation: for it speculates upon 
something, and produces something and does something. 

Look and see also if the definer renders each relative term 
relatively to its natural purpose: for while in some cases the 
particular relative term can be used in relation to its natural 
purpose only and to nothing else, some can be used in relation 
to something else as well. Thus sight can only be used for 
seeing, but a strigil can also be used to dip up water. Still, if any 
one were to define a strigil as an instrument for dipping water, 
he has made a mistake: for that is not its natural function. The 
definition of a thing’s natural function is ‘that for which it 
would be used by the prudent man, acting as such, and by the 
science that deals specially with that thing’. 

Or see if, whenever a term happens to be used in a number of 
relations, he has failed to introduce it in its primary relation: e.g. 
by defining ‘wisdom’ as the virtue of ‘man’ or of the ‘soul,’ 
rather than of the ‘reasoning faculty’: for ‘wisdom’ is the virtue 
primarily of the reasoning faculty: for it is in virtue of this that 
both the man and his soul are said to be wise. 


Moreover, if the thing of which the term defined has been 
stated to be an affection or disposition, or whatever it may be, 
be unable to admit it, the definer has made a mistake. For every 
disposition and every affection is formed naturally in that of 
which it is an affection or disposition, as knowledge, too, is 
formed in the soul, being a disposition of soul. Sometimes, 
however, people make bad mistakes in matters of this sort, e.g. 
all those who say that ‘sleep’ is a ‘failure of sensation’, or that 
‘perplexity’ is a state of ‘equality between contrary reasonings’, 
or that ‘pain’ is a ‘violent disruption of parts that are naturally 
conjoined’. For sleep is not an attribute of sensation, whereas it 
ought to be, if it is a failure of sensation. Likewise, perplexity is 
not an attribute of opposite reasonings, nor pain of parts 
naturally conjoined: for then inanimate things will be in pain, 
since pain will be present in them. Similar in character, too, is 
the definition of ‘health’, say, as a ‘balance of hot and cold 
elements’: for then health will be necessarily exhibited by the 
hot and cold elements: for balance of anything is an attribute 
inherent in those things of which it is the balance, so that 
health would be an attribute of them. Moreover, people who 
define in this way put effect for cause, or cause for effect. For 
the disruption of parts naturally conjoined is not pain, but only 
a cause of pain: nor again is a failure of sensation sleep, but the 
one is the cause of the other: for either we go to sleep because 
sensation fails, or sensation fails because we go to sleep. 
Likewise also an equality between contrary reasonings would be 
generally considered to be a cause of perplexity: for it is when 
we reflect on both sides of a question and find everything alike 
to be in keeping with either course that we are perplexed which 
of the two we are to do. 

Moreover, with regard to all periods of time look and see 
whether there be any discrepancy between the differentia and 
the thing defined: e.g. supposing the ‘immortal’ to be defined as 
a ‘living thing immune at present from destruction’. For a living 


thing that is immune ‘at present’ from destruction will be 
immortal ‘at present’. Possibly, indeed, in this case this result 
does not follow, owing to the ambiguity of the words ‘immune 
at present from destruction’: for it may mean either that the 
thing has not been destroyed at present, or that it cannot be 
destroyed at present, or that at present it is such that it never 
can be destroyed. Whenever, then, we say that a living thing is 
at present immune from destruction, we mean that it is at 
present a living thing of such a kind as never to be destroyed: 
and this is equivalent to saying that it is immortal, so that it is 
not meant that it is immortal only at present. Still, if ever it does 
happen that what has been rendered according to the definition 
belongs in the present only or past, whereas what is meant by 
the word does not so belong, then the two could not be the 
same. So, then, this commonplace rule ought to be followed, as 
we have said. 

You should look and see also whether the term being defined is 
applied in consideration of something other than the definition 
rendered. Suppose (e.g.) a definition of ‘justice’ as the ‘ability to 
distribute what is equal’. This would not be right, for ‘just’ 
describes rather the man who chooses, than the man who is 
able to distribute what is equal: so that justice could not be an 
ability to distribute what is equal: for then also the most just 
man would be the man with the most ability to distribute what 
is equal. 

Moreover, see if the thing admits of degrees, whereas what is 
rendered according to the definition does not, or, vice versa, 
what is rendered according to the definition admits of degrees 


while the thing does not. For either both must admit them or 
else neither, if indeed what is rendered according to the 
definition is the same as the thing. Moreover, see if, while both 
of them admit of degrees, they yet do not both become greater 
together: e.g. suppose sexual love to be the desire for 
intercourse: for he who is more intensely in love has not a more 
intense desire for intercourse, so that both do not become 
intensified at once: they certainly should, however, had they 
been the same thing. 

Moreover, suppose two things to be before you, see if the term 
to be defined applies more particularly to the one to which the 
content of the definition is less applicable. Take, for instance, 
the definition of ‘fire’ as the ‘body that consists of the most 
rarefied particles’. For ‘fire’ denotes flame rather than light, but 
flame is less the body that consists of the most rarefied 
particles than is light: whereas both ought to be more applicable 
to the same thing, if they had been the same. Again, see if the 
one expression applies alike to both the objects before you, 
while the other does not apply to both alike, but more 
particularly to one of them. 

Moreover, see if he renders the definition relative to two things 
taken separately: thus, the beautiful’ is ‘what is pleasant to the 
eyes or to the ears»: or ‘the real’ is ‘what is capable of being 
acted upon or of acting’. For then the same thing will be both 
beautiful and not beautiful, and likewise will be both real and 
not real. For ‘pleasant to the ears’ will be the same as ‘beautiful’, 
so that ‘not pleasant to the ears’ will be the same as ‘not 
beautiful’: for of identical things the opposites, too, are 
identical, and the opposite of ‘beautiful’ is ‘not beautiful’, while 
of ‘pleasant to the ears’ the opposite is not pleasant to the cars’: 
clearly, then, ‘not pleasant to the ears’ is the same thing as ‘not 
beautiful’. If, therefore, something be pleasant to the eyes but 
not to the ears, it will be both beautiful and not beautiful. In like 


manner we shall show also that the same thing is both real and 
unreal. 

Moreover, of both genera and differentiae and all the other 
terms rendered in definitions you should frame definitions in 
lieu of the terms, and then see if there be any discrepancy 
between them. 

If the term defined be relative, either in itself or in respect of its 
genus, see whether the definition fails to mention that to which 
the term, either in itself or in respect of its genus, is relative, e.g. 
if he has defined ‘knowledge’ as an ‘incontrovertible conception’ 
or ‘wishing’ as ‘painless conation’. For of everything relative the 
essence is relative to something else, seeing that the being of 
every relative term is identical with being in a certain relation to 
something. He ought, therefore, to have said that knowledge is 
‘conception of a knowable’ and that wishing is ‘conation for a 
good’. Likewise, also, if he has defined ‘grammar’ as ‘knowledge 
of letters’: whereas in the definition there ought to be rendered 
either the thing to which the term itself is relative, or that, 
whatever it is, to which its genus is relative. Or see if a relative 
term has been described not in relation to its end, the end in 
anything being whatever is best in it or gives its purpose to the 
rest. Certainly it is what is best or final that should be stated, 

e.g. that desire is not for the pleasant but for pleasure: for this is 
our purpose in choosing what is pleasant as well. 
Look and see also if that in relation to which he has rendered 
the term be a process or an activity: for nothing of that kind is 
an end, for the completion of the activity or process is the end 
rather than the process or activity itself. Or perhaps this rule is 


not true in all cases, for almost everybody prefers the present 
experience of pleasure to its cessation, so that they would count 
the activity as the end rather than its completion. 

Again see in some cases if he has failed to distinguish the 
quantity or quality or place or other differentiae of an object; 

e.g. the quality and quantity of the honour the striving for 
which makes a man ambitious: for all men strive for honour, so 
that it is not enough to define the ambitious man as him who 
strives for honour, but the aforesaid differentiae must be added. 
Likewise, also, in defining the covetous man the quantity of 
money he aims at, or in the case of the incontinent man the 
quality of the pleasures, should be stated. For it is not the man 
who gives way to any sort of pleasure whatever who is called 
incontinent, but only he who gives way to a certain kind of 
pleasure. Or again, people sometimes define night as a ‘shadow 
on the earth’, or an earthquake as a movement of the earth’, or 
a cloud as ‘condensation of the air’, or a wind as a ‘movement of 
the air’; whereas they ought to specify as well quantity, quality, 
place, and cause. Likewise, also, in other cases of the kind: for by 
omitting any differentiae whatever he fails to state the essence 
of the term. One should always attack deficiency. For a 
movement of the earth does not constitute an earthquake, nor a 
movement of the air a wind, irrespective of its manner and the 
amount involved. 
Moreover, in the case of conations, and in any other cases 
where it applies, see if the word ‘apparent’ is left out, e.g. 
‘wishing is a conation after the good’, or ‘desire is a conation 
after the pleasant’ – instead of saying ‘the apparently good’, or 
‘pleasant’. For often those who exhibit the conation do not 
perceive what is good or pleasant, so that their aim need not be 
really good or pleasant, but only apparently so. They ought, 
therefore, to have rendered the definition also accordingly. On 
the other hand, any one who maintains the existence of Ideas 


ought to be brought face to face with his Ideas, even though he 
does render the word in question: for there can be no Idea of 
anything merely apparent: the general view is that an Idea is 
always spoken of in relation to an Idea: thus absolute desire is 
for the absolutely pleasant, and absolute wishing is for the 
absolutely good; they therefore cannot be for an apparent good 
or an apparently pleasant: for the existence of an absolutely – 
apparently – good or pleasant would be an absurdity. 

Moreover, if the definition be of the state of anything, look at 
what is in the state, while if it be of what is in the state, look at 
the state: and likewise also in other cases of the kind. Thus if 
the pleasant be identical with the beneficial, then, too, the man 
who is pleased is benefited. Speaking generally, in definitions of 
this sort it happens that what the definer defines is in a sense 
more than one thing: for in defining knowledge, a man in a 
sense defines ignorance as well, and likewise also what has 
knowledge and what lacks it, and what it is to know and to be 
ignorant. For if the first be made clear, the others become in a 
certain sense clear as well. We have, then, to be on our guard in 
all such cases against discrepancy, using the elementary 
principles drawn from consideration of contraries and of 
coordinates. 

Moreover, in the case of relative terms, see if the species is 
rendered as relative to a species of that to which the genus is 
rendered as relative, e.g. supposing belief to be relative to some 
object of belief, see whether a particular belief is made relative 
to some particular object of belief: and, if a multiple be relative 
to a fraction, see whether a particular multiple be made relative 


to a particular fraction. For if it be not so rendered, clearly a 
mistake has been made. 

See, also, if the opposite of the term has the opposite definition, 
whether (e.g.) the definition of ‘half’ is the opposite of that of 
‘double’: for if ‘double’ is ‘that which exceeds another by an 
equal amount to that other’, ‘half’ is ‘that which is exceeded by 
an amount equal to itself’. In the same way, too, with contraries. 
For to the contrary term will apply the definition that is 
contrary in some one of the ways in which contraries are 
conjoined. Thus (e.g.) if ‘useful’=‘productive of good’, 
‘injurious’=productive of evil’ or ‘destructive of good’, for one or 
the other of thee is bound to be contrary to the term originally 
used. Suppose, then, neither of these things to be the contrary 
of the term originally used, then clearly neither of the 
definitions rendered later could be the definition of the contrary 
of the term originally defined: and therefore the definition 
originally rendered of the original term has not been rightly 
rendered either. Seeing, moreover, that of contraries, the one is 
sometimes a word forced to denote the privation of the other, as 
(e.g.) inequality is generally held to be the privation of equality 
(for ‘unequal’ merely describes things that are not equal’), it is 
therefore clear that that contrary whose form denotes the 
privation must of necessity be defined through the other; 
whereas the other cannot then be defined through the one 
whose form denotes the privation; for else we should find that 
each is being interpreted by the other. We must in the case of 
contrary terms keep an eye on this mistake, e.g. supposing any 
one were to define equality as the contrary of inequality: for 
then he is defining it through the term which denotes privation 
of it. Moreover, a man who so defines is bound to use in his 
definition the very term he is defining; and this becomes clear, 
if for the word we substitute its definition. For to say ‘inequality’ 
is the same as to say ‘privation of equality’. Therefore equality 
so defined will be ‘the contrary of the privation of equality’, so 


that he would have used the very word to be defined. Suppose, 
however, that neither of the contraries be so formed as to 
denote privation, but yet the definition of it be rendered in a 
manner like the above, e.g. suppose ‘good’ to be defined as ‘the 
contrary of evil’, then, since it is clear that ‘evil’ too will be ‘the 
contrary of good’ (for the definition of things that are contrary 
in this must be rendered in a like manner), the result again is 
that he uses the very term being defined: for ‘good’ is inherent 
in the definition of ‘evil’. If, then, ‘good’ be the contrary of evil, 
and evil be nothing other than the ‘contrary of good’, then 
‘good’ will be the ‘contrary of the contrary of good’. Clearly, 
then, he has used the very word to be defined. 

Moreover, see if in rendering a term formed to denote privation, 
he has failed to render the term of which it is the privation, e.g. 
the state, or contrary, or whatever it may be whose privation it 
is: also if he has omitted to add either any term at all in which 
the privation is naturally formed, or else that in which it is 
naturally formed primarily, e.g. whether in defining ‘ignorance’ 
a privation he has failed to say that it is the privation of 
‘knowledge’; or has failed to add in what it is naturally formed, 
or, though he has added this, has failed to render the thing in 
which it is primarily formed, placing it (e.g.) in ‘man’ or in ‘the 
soul’, and not in the ‘reasoning faculty’: for if in any of these 
respects he fails, he has made a mistake. Likewise, also, if he 
has failed to say that ‘blindness’ is the ‘privation of sight in an 
eye’: for a proper rendering of its essence must state both of 
what it is the privation and what it is that is deprived. 

Examine further whether he has defined by the expression ‘a 
privation’ a term that is not used to denote a privation: thus a 
mistake of this sort also would be generally thought to be 
incurred in the case of ‘error’ by any one who is not using it as a 
merely negative term. For what is generally thought to be in 
error is not that which has no knowledge, but rather that which 


has been deceived, and for this reason we do not talk of 
inanimate things or of children as ‘erring’. ‘Error’, then, is not 
used to denote a mere privation of knowledge. 

Moreover, see whether the like inflexions in the definition apply 
to the like inflexions of the term; e.g. if ‘beneficial’ means 
‘productive of health’, does ‘beneficially’ mean productively of 
health’ and a ‘benefactor’ a ‘producer of health’? 

Look too and see whether the definition given will apply to the 
Idea as well. For in some cases it will not do so; e.g. in the 
Platonic definition where he adds the word ‘mortal’ in his 
definitions of living creatures: for the Idea (e.g. the absolute 
Man) is not mortal, so that the definition will not fit the Idea. So 
always wherever the words ‘capable of acting on’ or ‘capable of 
being acted upon’ are added, the definition and the Idea are 
absolutely bound to be discrepant: for those who assert the 
existence of Ideas hold that they are incapable of being acted 
upon, or of motion. In dealing with these people even 
arguments of this kind are useful. 

Further, see if he has rendered a single common definition of 
terms that are used ambiguously. For terms whose definition 
corresponding their common name is one and the same, are 
synonymous; if, then, the definition applies in a like manner to 
the whole range of the ambiguous term, it is not true of any one 
of the objects described by the term. This is, moreover, what 
happens to Dionysius’ definition of ‘life’ when stated as ‘a 
movement of a creature sustained by nutriment, congenitally 
present with it’: for this is found in plants as much as in 
animals, whereas ‘life’ is generally understood to mean not one 


kind of thing only, but to be one thing in animals and another in 
plants. It is possible to hold the view that life is a synonymous 
term and is always used to describe one thing only, and 
therefore to render the definition in this way on purpose: or it 
may quite well happen that a man may see the ambiguous 
character of the word, and wish to render the definition of the 
one sense only, and yet fail to see that he has rendered a 
definition common to both senses instead of one peculiar to the 
sense he intends. In either case, whichever course he pursues, 
he is equally at fault. Since ambiguous terms sometimes pass 
unobserved, it is best in questioning to treat such terms as 
though they were synonymous (for the definition of the one 
sense will not apply to the other, so that the answerer will be 
generally thought not to have defined it correctly, for to a 
synonymous term the definition should apply in its full range), 
whereas in answering you should yourself distinguish between 
the senses. Further, as some answerers call ‘ambiguous’ what is 
really synonymous, whenever the definition rendered fails to 
apply universally, and, vice versa, call synonymous what is 
really ambiguous supposing their definition applies to both 
senses of the term, one should secure a preliminary admission 
on such points, or else prove beforehand that so-and-so is 
ambiguous or synonymous, as the case may be: for people are 
more ready to agree when they do not foresee what the 
consequence will be. If, however, no admission has been made, 
and the man asserts that what is really synonymous is 
ambiguous because the definition he has rendered will not 
apply to the second sense as well, see if the definition of this 
second meaning applies also to the other meanings: for if so, 
this meaning must clearly be synonymous with those others. 
Otherwise, there will be more than one definition of those other 
meanings, for there are applicable to them two distinct 
definitions in explanation of the term, viz. the one previously 
rendered and also the later one. Again, if any one were to define 


a term used in several senses, and, finding that his definition 
does not apply to them all, were to contend not that the term is 
ambiguous, but that even the term does not properly apply to 
all those senses, just because his definition will not do so either, 
then one may retort to such a man that though in some things 
one must not use the language of the people, yet in a question 
of terminology one is bound to employ the received and 
traditional usage and not to upset matters of that sort. 

Suppose now that a definition has been rendered of some 
complex term, take away the definition of one of the elements 
in the complex, and see if also the rest of the definition defines 
the rest of it: if not, it is clear that neither does the whole 
definition define the whole complex. Suppose, e.g. that some 
one has defined a ‘finite straight line’ as ‘the limit of a finite 
plane, such that its centre is in a line with its extremes’; if now 
the definition of a finite line’ be the ‘limit of a finite plane’, the 
rest (viz. ‘such that its centre is in a line with its extremes’) 
ought to be a definition of straight’. But an infinite straight line 
has neither centre nor extremes and yet is straight so that this 
remainder does not define the remainder of the term. 

Moreover, if the term defined be a compound notion, see if the 
definition rendered be equimembral with the term defined. A 
definition is said to be equimembral with the term defined 
when the number of the elements compounded in the latter is 
the same as the number of nouns and verbs in the definition. 
For the exchange in such cases is bound to be merely one of 
term for term, in the case of some if not of all, seeing that there 
are no more terms used now than formerly; whereas in a 


definition terms ought to be rendered by phrases, if possible in 
every case, or if not, in the majority. For at that rate, simple 
objects too could be defined by merely calling them by a 
different name, e.g. ‘cloak’ instead of ‘doublet’. 

The mistake is even worse, if actually a less well known term be 
substituted, e.g. ‘pellucid mortal’ for ‘white man’: for it is no 
definition, and moreover is less intelligible when put in that 
form. 

Look and see also whether, in the exchange of words, the sense 
fails still to be the same. Take, for instance, the explanation of 
‘speculative knowledge’ as ‘speculative conception’: for 
conception is not the same as knowledge – as it certainly ought 
to be if the whole is to be the same too: for though the word 
‘speculative’ is common to both expressions, yet the remainder 
is different. 

Moreover, see if in replacing one of the terms by something else 
he has exchanged the genus and not the differentia, as in the 
example just given: for ‘speculative’ is a less familiar term than 
knowledge; for the one is the genus and the other the 
differentia, and the genus is always the most familiar term of 
all; so that it is not this, but the differentia, that ought to have 
been changed, seeing that it is the less familiar. It might be held 
that this criticism is ridiculous: because there is no reason why 
the most familiar term should not describe the differentia, and 
not the genus; in which case, clearly, the term to be altered 
would also be that denoting the genus and not the differentia. 
If, however, a man is substituting for a term not merely another 
term but a phrase, clearly it is of the differentia rather than of 
the genus that a definition should be rendered, seeing that the 
object of rendering the definition is to make the subject 
familiar; for the differentia is less familiar than the genus. 


If he has rendered the definition of the differentia, see whether 
the definition rendered is common to it and something else as 
well: e.g. whenever he says that an odd number is a ‘number 
with a middle’, further definition is required of how it has a 
middle: for the word ‘number’ is common to both expressions, 
and it is the word ‘odd’ for which the phrase has been 
substituted. Now both a line and a body have a middle, yet they 
are not ‘odd’; so that this could not be a definition of ‘odd’. If, on 
the other hand, the phrase ‘with a middle’ be used in several 
senses, the sense here intended requires to be defined. So that 
this will either discredit the definition or prove that it is no 
definition at all. 

Again, see if the term of which he renders the definition is a 
reality, whereas what is contained in the definition is not, e.g. 
Suppose ‘white’ to be defined as ‘colour mingled with fire’: for 
what is bodiless cannot be mingled with body, so that ‘colour’ 
‘mingled with fire’ could not exist, whereas ‘white’ does exist. 

Moreover, those who in the case of relative terms do not 
distinguish to what the object is related, but have described it 
only so as to include it among too large a number of things, are 
wrong either wholly or in part; e.g. suppose some one to have 
defined ‘medicine’ as a science of Reality’. For if medicine be 
not a science of anything that is real, the definition is clearly 
altogether false; while if it be a science of some real thing, but 
not of another, it is partly false; for it ought to hold of all reality, 
if it is said to be of Reality essentially and not accidentally: as is 
the case with other relative terms: for every object of knowledge 
is a term relative to knowledge: likewise, also, with other 


relative terms, inasmuch as all such are convertible. Moreover, if 
the right way to render account of a thing be to render it as it is 
not in itself but accidentally, then each and every relative term 
would be used in relation not to one thing but to a number of 
things. For there is no reason why the same thing should not be 
both real and white and good, so that it would be a correct 
rendering to render the object in relation to any one whatsoever 
of these, if to render what it is accidentally be a correct way to 
render it. It is, moreover, impossible that a definition of this sort 
should be peculiar to the term rendered: for not only but the 
majority of the other sciences too, have for their object some 
real thing, so that each will be a science of reality. Clearly, then, 
such a definition does not define any science at all; for a 
definition ought to be peculiar to its own term, not general. 

Sometimes, again, people define not the thing but only the 
thing in a good or perfect condition. Such is the definition of a 
rhetorician as ‘one who can always see what will persuade in 
the given circumstances, and omit nothing’; or of a thief, as ‘one 
who pilfers in secret’: for clearly, if they each do this, then the 
one will be a good rhetorician, and the other a good thief: 
whereas it is not the actual pilfering in secret, but the wish to 
do it, that constitutes the thief. 

Again, see if he has rendered what is desirable for its own sake 
as desirable for what it produces or does, or as in any way 
desirable because of something else, e.g. by saying that justice is 
‘what preserves the laws’ or that wisdom is ‘what produces 
happiness’; for what produces or preserves something else is 
one of the things desirable for something else. It might be said 
that it is possible for what is desirable in itself to be desirable 
for something else as well: but still to define what is desirable in 
itself in such a way is none the less wrong: for the essence 
contains par excellence what is best in anything, and it is better 
for a thing to be desirable in itself than to be desirable for 


something else, so that this is rather what the definition too 
ought to have indicated. 

See also whether in defining anything a man has defined it as 
an ‘A and B’, or as a ‘product of A and B’ or as an ‘A+B’. If he 
defines it as and B’, the definition will be true of both and yet of 
neither of them; suppose, e.g. justice to be defined as 
‘temperance and courage.’ For if of two persons each has one of 
the two only, both and yet neither will be just: for both together 
have justice, and yet each singly fails to have it. Even if the 
situation here described does not so far appear very absurd 
because of the occurrence of this kind of thing in other cases 
also (for it is quite possible for two men to have a mina between 
them, though neither of them has it by himself), yet least that 
they should have contrary attributes surely seems quite absurd; 
and yet this will follow if the one be temperate and yet a 
coward, and the other, though brave, be a profligate; for then 
both will exhibit both justice and injustice: for if justice be 
temperance and bravery, then injustice will be cowardice and 
profligacy. In general, too, all the ways of showing that the 
whole is not the same as the sum of its parts are useful in 
meeting the type just described; for a man who defines in this 
way seems to assert that the parts are the same as the whole. 
The arguments are particularly appropriate in cases where the 
process of putting the parts together is obvious, as in a house 
and other things of that sort: for there, clearly, you may have the 
parts and yet not have the whole, so that parts and whole 
cannot be the same. 


If, however, he has said that the term being defined is not ‘A and 
B’ but the ‘product of A and B’, look and see in the first place if A 
and B cannot in the nature of things have a single product: for 
some things are so related to one another that nothing can 
come of them, e.g. a line and a number. Moreover, see if the 
term that has been defined is in the nature of things found 
primarily in some single subject, whereas the things which he 
has said produce it are not found primarily in any single subject, 
but each in a separate one. If so, clearly that term could not be 
the product of these things: for the whole is bound to be in the 
same things wherein its parts are, so that the whole will then be 
found primarily not in one subject only, but in a number of 
them. If, on the other hand, both parts and whole are found 
primarily in some single subject, see if that medium is not the 
same, but one thing in the case of the whole and another in 
that of the parts. Again, see whether the parts perish together 
with the whole: for it ought to happen, vice versa, that the 
whole perishes when the parts perish; when the whole 
perishes, there is no necessity that the parts should perish too. 
Or again, see if the whole be good or evil, and the parts neither, 
or, vice versa, if the parts be good or evil and the whole neither. 
For it is impossible either for a neutral thing to produce 
something good or bad, or for things good or bad to produce a 
neutral thing. Or again, see if the one thing is more distinctly 
good than the other is evil, and yet the product be no more good 
than evil, e.g. suppose shamelessness be defined as ‘the product 
of courage and false opinion’: here the goodness of courage 
exceeds the evil of false opinion; accordingly the product of 
these ought to have corresponded to this excess, and to be 
either good without qualification, or at least more good than 
evil. Or it may be that this does not necessarily follow, unless 
each be in itself good or bad; for many things that are 
productive are not good in themselves, but only in combination; 
or, per contra, they are good taken singly, and bad or neutral in 


combination. What has just been said is most clearly illustrated 
in the case of things that make for health or sickness; for some 
drugs are such that each taken alone is good, but if they are 
both administered in a mixture, bad. 

Again, see whether the whole, as produced from a better and 
worse, fails to be worse than the better and better than the 
worse element. This again, however, need not necessarily be the 
case, unless the elements compounded be in themselves good; 
if they are not, the whole may very well not be good, as in the 
cases just instanced. 

Moreover, see if the whole be synonymous with one of the 
elements: for it ought not to be, any more than in the case of 
syllables: for the syllable is not synonymous with any of the 
letters of which it is made up. 

Moreover, see if he has failed to state the manner of their 
composition: for the mere mention of its elements is not 
enough to make the thing intelligible. For the essence of any 
compound thing is not merely that it is a product of so-and-so, 
but that it is a product of them compounded in such and such a 
way, just as in the case of a house: for here the materials do not 
make a house irrespective of the way they are put together. 

If a man has defined an object as ‘A+B’, the first thing to be said 
is that ‘A+B’ means the same either as ‘A and B’, or as the 
‘product of A and B.’ for ‘honey+water’ means either the honey 
and the water, or the ‘drink made of honey and water’. If, then, 
he admits that ‘A+B’ is + B’ is the same as either of these two 
things, the same criticisms will apply as have already been 
given for meeting each of them. Moreover, distinguish between 
the different senses in which one thing may be said to be ‘+’ 
another, and see if there is none of them in which A could be 
said to exist ‘+ B.’ Thus e.g. supposing the expression to mean 
that they exist either in some identical thing capable of 


containing them (as e.g. justice and courage are found in the 
soul), or else in the same place or in the same time, and if this 
be in no way true of the A and B in question, clearly the 
definition rendered could not hold of anything, as there is no 
possible way in which A can exist B’. If, however, among the 
various senses above distinguished, it be true that A and B are 
each found in the same time as the other, look and see if 
possibly the two are not used in the same relation. Thus e.g. 
suppose courage to have been defined as ‘daring with right 
reasoning’: here it is possible that the person exhibits daring in 
robbery, and right reasoning in regard to the means of health: 
but he may have ‘the former quality+the latter’ at the same 
time, and not as yet be courageous! Moreover, even though both 
be used in the same relation as well, e.g. in relation to medical 
treatment (for a man may exhibit both daring and right 
reasoning in respect of medical treatment), still, none the less, 
not even this combination of ‘the one+the other ‘makes him 
‘courageous’. For the two must not relate to any casual object 
that is the same, any more than each to a different object; 
rather, they must relate to the function of courage, e.g. meeting 
the perils of war, or whatever is more properly speaking its 
function than this. 

Some definitions rendered in this form fail to come under the 
aforesaid division at all, e.g. a definition of anger as ‘pain with a 
consciousness of being slighted’. For what this means to say is 
that it is because of a consciousness of this sort that the pain 
occurs; but to occur ‘because of’ a thing is not the same as to 
occur ‘+ a thing’ in any of its aforesaid senses. 


Again, if he have described the whole compounded as the 
‘composition’ of these things (e.g. ‘a living creature’ as a 
‘composition of soul and body’), first of all see whether he has 
omitted to state the kind of composition, as (e.g.) in a definition 
of ‘flesh’ or ‘bone’ as the ‘composition of fire, earth, and air’. For 
it is not enough to say it is a composition, but you should also 
go on to define the kind of composition: for these things do not 
form flesh irrespective of the manner of their composition, but 
when compounded in one way they form flesh, when in 
another, bone. It appears, moreover, that neither of the 
aforesaid substances is the same as a ‘composition’ at all: for a 
composition always has a decomposition as its contrary, 
whereas neither of the aforesaid has any contrary. Moreover, if 
it is equally probable that every compound is a composition or 
else that none is, and every kind of living creature, though a 
compound, is never a composition, then no other compound 
could be a composition either. 

Again, if in the nature of a thing two contraries are equally 
liable to occur, and the thing has been defined through the one, 
clearly it has not been defined; else there will be more than one 
definition of the same thing; for how is it any more a definition 
to define it through this one than through the other, seeing that 
both alike are naturally liable to occur in it? Such is the 
definition of the soul, if defined as a substance capable of 
receiving knowledge: for it has a like capacity for receiving 
ignorance. 

Also, even when one cannot attack the definition as a whole for 
lack of acquaintance with the whole, one should attack some 
part of it, if one knows that part and sees it to be incorrectly 
rendered: for if the part be demolished, so too is the whole 
definition. Where, again, a definition is obscure, one should first 


of all correct and reshape it in order to make some part of it 
clear and get a handle for attack, and then proceed to examine 
it. For the answerer is bound either to accept the sense as taken 
by the questioner, or else himself to explain clearly whatever it 
is that his definition means. Moreover, just as in the assemblies 
the ordinary practice is to move an emendation of the existing 
law and, if the emendation is better, they repeal the existing 
law, so one ought to do in the case of definitions as well: one 
ought oneself to propose a second definition: for if it is seen to 
be better, and more indicative of the object defined, clearly the 
definition already laid down will have been demolished, on the 
principle that there cannot be more than one definition of the 
same thing. 

In combating definitions it is always one of the chief 
elementary principles to take by oneself a happy shot at a 
definition of the object before one, or to adopt some correctly 
expressed definition. For one is bound, with the model (as it 
were) before one’s eyes, to discern both any shortcoming in any 
features that the definition ought to have, and also any 
superfluous addition, so that one is better supplied with lines of 
attack. 

As to definitions, then, let so much suffice. 

Book VII 



Whether two things are ‘the same’ or ‘different’, in the most 
literal of the meanings ascribed to ‘sameness’ (and we said’ that 
‘the same’ applies in the most literal sense to what is 
numerically one), may be examined in the light of their 
inflexions and coordinates and opposites. For if justice be the 
same as courage, then too the just man is the same as the brave 
man, and ‘justly’ is the same as ‘bravely’. Likewise, too, in the 
case of their opposites: for if two things be the same, their 
opposites also will be the same, in any of the recognized forms 
of opposition. For it is the same thing to take the opposite of the 
one or that of the other, seeing that they are the same. Again it 
may be examined in the light of those things which tend to 
produce or to destroy the things in question of their formation 
and destruction, and in general of any thing that is related in 
like manner to each. For where things are absolutely the same, 
their formations and destructions also are the same, and so are 
the things that tend to produce or to destroy them. Look and 
see also, in a case where one of two things is said to be 
something or other in a superlative degree, if the other of these 
alleged identical things can also be described by a superlative in 
the same respect. Thus Xenocrates argues that the happy life 
and the good life are the same, seeing that of all forms of life 
the good life is the most desirable and so also is the happy life: 
for ‘the most desirable’ and the greatest’ apply but to one thing.’ 
Likewise also in other cases of the kind. Each, however, of the 
two things termed ‘greatest’ or most desirable’ must be 
numerically one: otherwise no proof will have been given that 
they are the same; for it does not follow because 
Peloponnesians and Spartans are the bravest of the Greeks, that 
Peloponnesians are the same as Spartans, seeing that 
‘Peloponnesian’ is not any one person nor yet ‘Spartan’; it only 
follows that the one must be included under the other as 
‘Spartans’ are under ‘Peloponnesians’: for otherwise, if the one 


class be not included under the other, each will be better than 
the other. For then the Peloponnesians are bound to be better 
than the Spartans, seeing that the one class is not included 
under the other; for they are better than anybody else. Likewise 
also the Spartans must perforce be better than the 
Peloponnesians; for they too are better than anybody else; each 
then is better than the other! Clearly therefore what is styled 
‘best’ and ‘greatest’ must be a single thing, if it is to be proved to 
be ‘the same’ as another. This also is why Xenocrates fails to 
prove his case: for the happy life is not numerically single, nor 
yet the good life, so that it does not follow that, because they are 
both the most desirable, they are therefore the same, but only 
that the one falls under the other. 

Again, look and see if, supposing the one to be the same as 
something, the other also is the same as it: for if they be not 
both the same as the same thing, clearly neither are they the 
same as one another. 

Moreover, examine them in the light of their accidents or of the 
things of which they are accidents: for any accident belonging 
to the one must belong also to the other, and if the one belong 
to anything as an accident, so must the other also. If in any of 
these respects there is a discrepancy, clearly they are not the 
same. 

See further whether, instead of both being found in one class of 
predicates, the one signifies a quality and the other a quantity 
or relation. Again, see if the genus of each be not the same, the 
one being ‘good’ and the other evil’, or the one being ‘virtue’ and 
the other ‘knowledge’: or see if, though the genus is the same, 
the differentiae predicted of either be not the same, the one 
(e.g.) being distinguished as a ‘speculative’ science, the other as 
a ‘practical’ science. Likewise also in other cases. 


Moreover, from the point of view of ‘degrees’, see if the one 
admits an increase of degree but not the other, or if though both 
admit it, they do not admit it at the same time; just as it is not 
the case that a man desires intercourse more intensely, the 
more intensely he is in love, so that love and the desire for 
intercourse are not the same. 

Moreover, examine them by means of an addition, and see 
whether the addition of each to the same thing fails to make 
the same whole; or if the subtraction of the same thing from 
each leaves a different remainder. Suppose (e.g.) that he has 
declared ‘double a half’ to be the same as ‘a multiple of a half’: 
then, subtracting the words ‘a half’ from each, the remainders 
ought to have signified the same thing: but they do not; for 
‘double’ and ‘a multiple of’ do not signify the same thing. 

Inquire also not only if some impossible consequence results 
directly from the statement made, that A and B are the same, 
but also whether it is possible for a supposition to bring it 
about; as happens to those who assert that ‘empty’ is the same 
as ‘full of air’: for clearly if the air be exhausted, the vessel will 
not be less but more empty, though it will no longer be full of 
air. So that by a supposition, which may be true or may be false 
(it makes no difference which), the one character is annulled 
and not the other, showing that they are not the same. 

Speaking generally, one ought to be on the look-out for any 
discrepancy anywhere in any sort of predicate of each term, and 
in the things of which they are predicated. For all that is 
predicated of the one should be predicated also of the other, 
and of whatever the one is a predicate, the other should be a 
predicate of it as well. 

Moreover, as ‘sameness’ is a term used in many senses, see 
whether things that are the same in one way are the same also 
in a different way. For there is either no necessity or even no 


possibility that things that are the same specifically or 
generically should be numerically the same, and it is with the 
question whether they are or are not the same in that sense 
that we are concerned. 

Moreover, see whether the one can exist without the other; for, 
if so, they could not be the same. 

2 

Such is the number of the commonplace rules that relate to 
‘sameness’. It is clear from what has been said that all the 
destructive commonplaces relating to sameness are useful also 
in questions of definition, as was said before:’ for if what is 
signified by the term and by the expression be not the same, 
clearly the expression rendered could not be a definition. None 
of the constructive commonplaces, on the other hand, helps in 
the matter of definition; for it is not enough to show the 
sameness of content between the expression and the term, in 
order to establish that the former is a definition, but a definition 
must have also all the other characters already announced. 

3 

This then is the way, and these the arguments, whereby the 
attempt to demolish a definition should always be made. If, on 
the other hand, we desire to establish one, the first thing to 
observe is that few if any who engage in discussion arrive at a 
definition by reasoning: they always assume something of the 
kind as their starting points – both in geometry and in 


arithmetic and the other studies of that kind. In the second 
place, to say accurately what a definition is, and how it should 
be given, belongs to another inquiry. At present it concerns us 
only so far as is required for our present purpose, and 
accordingly we need only make the bare statement that to 
reason to a thing’s definition and essence is quite possible. For if 
a definition is an expression signifying the essence of the thing 
and the predicates contained therein ought also to be the only 
ones which are predicated of the thing in the category of 
essence; and genera and differentiae are so predicated in that 
category: it is obvious that if one were to get an admission that 
so and so are the only attributes predicated in that category, the 
expression containing so and so would of necessity be a 
definition; for it is impossible that anything else should be a 
definition, seeing that there is not anything else predicated of 
the thing in the category of essence. 

That a definition may thus be reached by a process of reasoning 
is obvious. The means whereby it should be established have 
been more precisely defined elsewhere, but for the purposes of 
the inquiry now before us the same commonplace rules serve. 
For we have to examine into the contraries and other opposites 
of the thing, surveying the expressions used both as wholes and 
in detail: for if the opposite definition defines that opposite 
term, the definition given must of necessity be that of the term 
before us. Seeing, however, that contraries may be conjoined in 
more than one way, we have to select from those contraries the 
one whose contrary definition seems most obvious. The 
expressions, then, have to be examined each as a whole in the 
way we have said, and also in detail as follows. First of all, see 
that the genus rendered is correctly rendered; for if the contrary 
thing be found in the contrary genus to that stated in the 
definition, and the thing before you is not in that same genus, 
then it would clearly be in the contrary genus: for contraries 
must of necessity be either in the same genus or in contrary 


genera. The differentiae, too, that are predicated of contraries 
we expect to be contrary, e.g. those of white and black, for the 
one tends to pierce the vision, while the other tends to 
compress it. So that if contrary differentiae to those in the 
definition are predicated of the contrary term, then those 
rendered in the definition would be predicated of the term 
before us. Seeing, then, that both the genus and the differentiae 
have been rightly rendered, clearly the expression given must 
be the right definition. It might be replied that there is no 
necessity why contrary differentiae should be predicated of 
contraries, unless the contraries be found within the same 
genus: of things whose genera are themselves contraries it may 
very well be that the same differentia is used of both, e.g. of 
justice and injustice; for the one is a virtue and the other a vice 
of the soul: ‘of the soul’, therefore, is the differentia in both 
cases, seeing that the body as well has its virtue and vice. But 
this much at least is true, that the differentiae of contraries are 
either contrary or else the same. If, then, the contrary 
differentia to that given be predicated of the contrary term and 
not of the one in hand, clearly the differentia stated must be 
predicated of the latter. Speaking generally, seeing that the 
definition consists of genus and differentiae, if the definition of 
the contrary term be apparent, the definition of the term before 
you will be apparent also: for since its contrary is found either 
in the same genus or in the contrary genus, and likewise also 
the differentiae predicated of opposites are either contrary to, or 
the same as, each other, clearly of the term before you there will 
be predicated either the same genus as of its contrary, while, of 
its differentiae, either all are contrary to those of its contrary, or 
at least some of them are so while the rest remain the same; or, 
vice versa, the differentiae will be the same and the genera 
contrary; or both genera and differentiae will be contrary. And 
that is all; for that both should be the same is not possible; else 
contraries will have the same definition. 


Moreover, look at it from the point of view of its inflexions and 
coordinates. For genera and definitions are bound to correspond 
in either case. Thus if forgetfulness be the loss of knowledge, to 
forget is to lose knowledge, and to have forgotten is to have lost 
knowledge. If, then, any one whatever of these is agreed to, the 
others must of necessity be agreed to as well. Likewise, also, if 
destruction is the decomposition of the thing’s essence, then to 
be destroyed is to have its essence decomposed, and 
‘destructively’ means ‘in such a way as to decompose its 
essence’; if again ‘destructive’ means ‘apt to decompose 
something’s essence’, then also ‘destruction’ means ‘the 
decomposition of its essence’. Likewise also with the rest: an 
admission of any one of them whatever, and all the rest are 
admitted too. 

Moreover, look at it from the point of view of things that stand 
in relations that are like each other. For if ‘healthy’ means 
‘productive of health’, ‘vigorous’ too will mean ‘productive of 
vigour’, and ‘useful’ will mean ‘productive of good.’ For each of 
these things is related in like manner to its own peculiar end, so 
that if one of them is defined as ‘productive of’ that end, this 
will also be the definition of each of the rest as well. 

Moreover, look at it from the point of and like degrees, in all the 
ways in which it is possible to establish a result by comparing 
two and two together. Thus if A defines a better than B defines 
and B is a definition of so too is A of a. Further, if A’s claim to 
define a is like B’s to define B, and B defines B, then A too 
defines a. This examination from the point of view of greater 
degrees is of no use when a single definition is compared with 
two things, or two definitions with one thing; for there cannot 
possibly be one definition of two things or two of the same 
thing. 


The most handy of all the commonplace arguments are those 
just mentioned and those from co-ordinates and inflexions, and 
these therefore are those which it is most important to master 
and to have ready to hand: for they are the most useful on the 
greatest number of occasions. Of the rest, too, the most 
important are those of most general application: for these are 
the most effective, e.g. that you should examine the individual 
cases, and then look to see in the case of their various species 
whether the definition applies. For the species is synonymous 
with its individuals. This sort of inquiry is of service against 
those who assume the existence of Ideas, as has been said 
before.’ Moreover see if a man has used a term metaphorically, 
or predicated it of itself as though it were something different. 
So too if any other of the commonplace rules is of general 
application and effective, it should be employed. 

That it is more difficult to establish than to overthrow a 
definition, is obvious from considerations presently to be urged. 
For to see for oneself, and to secure from those whom one is 
questioning, an admission of premisses of this sort is no simple 
matter, e.g. that of the elements of the definition rendered the 
one is genus and the other differentia, and that only the genus 
and differentiae are predicated in the category of essence. Yet 
without these premisses it is impossible to reason to a 
definition; for if any other things as well are predicated of the 
thing in the category of essence, there is no telling whether the 
formula stated or some other one is its definition, for a 


definition is an expression indicating the essence of a thing. The 
point is clear also from the following: It is easier to draw one 
conclusion than many. Now in demolishing a definition it is 
sufficient to argue against one point only (for if we have 
overthrown any single point whatsoever, we shall have 
demolished the definition); whereas in establishing a definition, 
one is bound to bring people to the view that everything 
contained in the definition is attributable. Moreover, in 
establishing a case, the reasoning brought forward must be 
universal: for the definition put forward must be predicated of 
everything of which the term is predicated, and must moreover 
be convertible, if the definition rendered is to be peculiar to the 
subject. In overthrowing a view, on the other hand, there is no 
longer any necessity to show one’s point universally: for it is 
enough to show that the formula is untrue of any one of the 
things embraced under the term. 

Further, even supposing it should be necessary to overthrow 
something by a universal proposition, not even so is there any 
need to prove the converse of the proposition in the process of 
overthrowing the definition. For merely to show that the 
definition fails to be predicated of every one of the things of 
which the term is predicated, is enough to overthrow it 
universally: and there is no need to prove the converse of this in 
order to show that the term is predicated of things of which the 
expression is not predicated. Moreover, even if it applies to 
everything embraced under the term, but not to it alone, the 
definition is thereby demolished. 

The case stands likewise in regard to the property and genus of 
a term also. For in both cases it is easier to overthrow than to 
establish. As regards the property this is clear from what has 
been said: for as a rule the property is rendered in a complex 
phrase, so that to overthrow it, it is only necessary to demolish 
one of the terms used, whereas to establish it is necessary to 


reason to them all. Then, too, nearly all the other rules that 
apply to the definition will apply also to the property of a thing. 
For in establishing a property one has to show that it is true of 
everything included under the term in question, whereas to 
overthrow one it is enough to show in a single case only that it 
fails to belong: further, even if it belongs to everything falling 
under the term, but not to that only, it is overthrown in this case 
as well, as was explained in the case of the definition. In regard 
to the genus, it is clear that you are bound to establish it in one 
way only, viz. by showing that it belongs in every case, while of 
overthrowing it there are two ways: for if it has been shown that 
it belongs either never or not in a certain case, the original 
statement has been demolished. Moreover, in establishing a 
genus it is not enough to show that it belongs, but also that it 
belongs as genus has to be shown; whereas in overthrowing it, 
it is enough to show its failure to belong either in some 
particular case or in every case. It appears, in fact, as though, 
just as in other things to destroy is easier than to create, so in 
these matters too to overthrow is easier than to establish. 

In the case of an accidental attribute the universal proposition 
is easier to overthrow than to establish; for to establish it, one 
has to show that it belongs in every case, whereas to overthrow 
it, it is enough to show that it does not belong in one single 
case. The particular proposition is, on the contrary, easier to 
establish than to overthrow: for to establish it, it is enough to 
show that it belongs in a particular instance, whereas to 
overthrow it, it has to be shown that it never belongs at all. 

It is clear also that the easiest thing of all is to overthrow a 
definition. For on account of the number of statements involved 
we are presented in the definition with the greatest number of 
points for attack, and the more plentiful the material, the 
quicker an argument comes: for there is more likelihood of a 
mistake occurring in a large than in a small number of things. 


Moreover, the other rules too may be used as means for 
attacking a definition: for if either the formula be not peculiar, 
or the genus rendered be the wrong one, or something included 
in the formula fail to belong, the definition is thereby 
demolished. On the other hand, against the others we cannot 
bring all of the arguments drawn from definitions, nor yet of the 
rest: for only those relating to accidental attributes apply 
generally to all the aforesaid kinds of attribute. For while each 
of the aforesaid kinds of attribute must belong to the thing in 
question, yet the genus may very well not belong as a property 
without as yet being thereby demolished. Likewise also the 
property need not belong as a genus, nor the accident as a 
genus or property, so long as they do belong. So that it is 
impossible to use one set as a basis of attack upon the other 
except in the case of definition. Clearly, then, it is the easiest of 
all things to demolish a definition, while to establish one is the 
hardest. For there one both has to establish all those other 
points by reasoning (i.e. that the attributes stated belong, and 
that the genus rendered is the true genus, and that the formula 
is peculiar to the term), and moreover, besides this, that the 
formula indicates the essence of the thing; and this has to be 
done correctly. 

Of the rest, the property is most nearly of this kind: for it is 
easier to demolish, because as a rule it contains several terms; 
while it is the hardest to establish, both because of the number 
of things that people must be brought to accept, and, besides 
this, because it belongs to its subject alone and is predicated 
convertibly with its subject. 

The easiest thing of all to establish is an accidental predicate: 
for in other cases one has to show not only that the predicate 
belongs, but also that it belongs in such and such a particular 
way: whereas in the case of the accident it is enough to show 
merely that it belongs. On the other hand, an accidental 


predicate is the hardest thing to overthrow, because it affords 
the least material: for in stating accident a man does not add 
how the predicate belongs; and accordingly, while in other cases 
it is possible to demolish what is said in two ways, by showing 
either that the predicate does not belong, or that it does not 
belong in the particular way stated, in the case of an accidental 
predicate the only way to demolish it is to show that it does not 
belong at all. 

The commonplace arguments through which we shall be well 
supplied with lines of argument with regard to our several 
problems have now been enumerated at about sufficient length. 

Book VIII 

Next there fall to be discussed the problems of arrangement 
and method in pitting questions. Any one who intends to frame 
questions must, first of all, select the ground from which he 
should make his attack; secondly, he must frame them and 
arrange them one by one to himself; thirdly and lastly, he must 
proceed actually to put them to the other party. Now so far as 
the selection of his ground is concerned the problem is one 
alike for the philosopher and the dialectician; but how to go on 
to arrange his points and frame his questions concerns the 
dialectician only: for in every problem of that kind a reference 
to another party is involved. Not so with the philosopher, and 


the man who is investigating by himself: the premisses of his 
reasoning, although true and familiar, may be refused by the 
answerer because they lie too near the original statement and 
so he foresees what will follow if he grants them: but for this 
the philosopher does not care. Nay, he may possibly be even 
anxious to secure axioms as familiar and as near to the 
question in hand as possible: for these are the bases on which 
scientific reasonings are built up. 

The sources from which one’s commonplace arguments should 
be drawn have already been described:’ we have now to discuss 
the arrangement and formation of questions and first to 
distinguish the premisses, other than the necessary premisses, 
which have to be adopted. By necessary premisses are meant 
those through which the actual reasoning is constructed. Those 
which are secured other than these are of four kinds; they serve 
either inductively to secure the universal premiss being granted, 
or to lend weight to the argument, or to conceal the conclusion, 
or to render the argument more clear. Beside these there is no 
other premiss which need be secured: these are the ones 
whereby you should try to multiply and formulate your 
questions. Those which are used to conceal the conclusion 
serve a controversial purpose only; but inasmuch as an 
undertaking of this sort is always conducted against another 
person, we are obliged to employ them as well. 

The necessary premisses through which the reasoning is 
effected, ought not to be propounded directly in so many words. 
Rather one should soar as far aloof from them as possible. Thus 
if one desires to secure an admission that the knowledge of 
contraries is one, one should ask him to admit it not of 
contraries, but of opposites: for, if he grants this, one will then 
argue that the knowledge of contraries is also the same, seeing 
that contraries are opposites; if he does not, one should secure 
the admission by induction, by formulating a proposition to that 


effect in the case of some particular pair of contraries. For one 
must secure the necessary premisses either by reasoning or by 
induction, or else partly by one and partly by the other, 
although any propositions which are too obvious to be denied 
may be formulated in so many words. This is because the 
coming conclusion is less easily discerned at the greater 
distance and in the process of induction, while at the same 
time, even if one cannot reach the required premisses in this 
way, it is still open to one to formulate them in so many words. 
The premisses, other than these, that were mentioned above, 
must be secured with a view to the latter. The way to employ 
them respectively is as follows: Induction should proceed from 
individual cases to the universal and from the known to the 
unknown; and the objects of perception are better known, to 
most people if not invariably. Concealment of one’s plan is 
obtained by securing through prosyllogisms the premisses 
through which the proof of the original proposition is going to 
be constructed – and as many of them as possible. This is likely 
to be effected by making syllogisms to prove not only the 
necessary premisses but also some of those which are required 
to establish them. Moreover, do not state the conclusions of 
these premisses but draw them later one after another; for this 
is likely to keep the answerer at the greatest possible distance 
from the original proposition. Speaking generally, a man who 
desires to get information by a concealed method should so put 
his questions that when he has put his whole argument and 
has stated the conclusion, people still ask ‘Well, but why is 
that?’ This result will be secured best of all by the method above 
described: for if one states only the final conclusion, it is 
unclear how it comes about; for the answerer does not foresee 
on what grounds it is based, because the previous syllogisms 
have not been made articulate to him: while the final syllogism, 
showing the conclusion, is likely to be kept least articulate if we 


lay down not the secured propositions on which it is based, but 
only the grounds on which we reason to them. 

It is a useful rule, too, not to secure the admissions claimed as 
the bases of the syllogisms in their proper order, but alternately 
those that conduce to one conclusion and those that conduce to 
another; for, if those which go together are set side by side, the 
conclusion that will result from them is more obvious in 
advance. 

One should also, wherever possible, secure the universal 
premiss by a definition relating not to the precise terms 
themselves but to their co-ordinates; for people deceive 
themselves, whenever the definition is taken in regard to a coordinate, 
into thinking that they are not making the admission 
universally. An instance would be, supposing one had to secure 
the admission that the angry man desires vengeance on 
account of an apparent slight, and were to secure this, that 
‘anger’ is a desire for vengeance on account of an apparent 
slight: for, clearly, if this were secured, we should have 
universally what we intend. If, on the other hand, people 
formulate propositions relating to the actual terms themselves, 
they often find that the answerer refuses to grant them because 
on the actual term itself he is readier with his objection, e.g. 
that the ‘angry man’ does not desire vengeance, because we 
become angry with our parents, but we do not desire vengeance 
on them. Very likely the objection is not valid; for upon some 
people it is vengeance enough to cause them pain and make 
them sorry; but still it gives a certain plausibility and air of 
reasonableness to the denial of the proposition. In the case, 
however, of the definition of ‘anger’ it is not so easy to find an 
objection. 

Moreover, formulate your proposition as though you did so not 
for its own sake, but in order to get at something else: for people 


are shy of granting what an opponent’s case really requires. 
Speaking generally, a questioner should leave it as far as 
possible doubtful whether he wishes to secure an admission of 
his proposition or of its opposite: for if it be uncertain what 
their opponent’s argument requires, people are more ready to 
say what they themselves think. 

Moreover, try to secure admissions by means of likeness: for 
such admissions are plausible, and the universal involved is less 
patent; e.g. make the other person admit that as knowledge and 
ignorance of contraries is the same, so too perception of 
contraries is the same; or vice versa, that since the perception is 
the same, so is the knowledge also. This argument resembles 
induction, but is not the same thing; for in induction it is the 
universal whose admission is secured from the particulars, 
whereas in arguments from likeness, what is secured is not the 
universal under which all the like cases fall. 

It is a good rule also, occasionally to bring an objection against 
oneself: for answerers are put off their guard against those who 
appear to be arguing impartially. It is useful too, to add that ‘So 
and so is generally held or commonly said’; for people are shy of 
upsetting the received opinion unless they have some positive 
objection to urge: and at the same time they are cautious about 
upsetting such things because they themselves too find them 
useful. Moreover, do not be insistent, even though you really 
require the point: for insistence always arouses the more 
opposition. Further, formulate your premiss as though it were a 
mere illustration: for people admit the more readily a 
proposition made to serve some other purpose, and not 
required on its own account. Moreover, do not formulate the 
very proposition you need to secure, but rather something from 
which that necessarily follows: for people are more willing to 
admit the latter, because it is not so clear from this what the 
result will be, and if the one has been secured, the other has 


been secured also. Again, one should put last the point which 
one most wishes to have conceded; for people are specially 
inclined to deny the first questions put to them, because most 
people in asking questions put first the points which they are 
most eager to secure. On the other hand, in dealing with some 
people propositions of this sort should be put forward first: for 
ill-tempered men admit most readily what comes first, unless 
the conclusion that will result actually stares them in the face, 
while at the close of an argument they show their ill-temper. 
Likewise also with those who consider themselves smart at 
answering: for when they have admitted most of what you want 
they finally talk clap-trap to the effect that the conclusion does 
not follow from their admissions: yet they say ‘Yes’ readily, 
confident in their own character, and imagining that they 
cannot suffer any reverse. Moreover, it is well to expand the 
argument and insert things that it does not require at all, as do 
those who draw false geometrical figures: for in the multitude 
of details the whereabouts of the fallacy is obscured. For this 
reason also a questioner sometimes evades observation as he 
adds in a corner what, if he formulated it by itself, would not be 
granted. 

For concealment, then, the rules which should be followed are 
the above. Ornament is attained by induction and distinction of 
things closely akin. What sort of process induction is obvious: as 
for distinction, an instance of the kind of thing meant is the 
distinction of one form of knowledge as better than another by 
being either more accurate, or concerned with better objects; or 
the distinction of sciences into speculative, practical, and 
productive. For everything of this kind lends additional 
ornament to the argument, though there is no necessity to say 
them, so far as the conclusion goes. 

For clearness, examples and comparisons should be adduced, 
and let the illustrations be relevant and drawn from things that 


we know, as in Homer and not as in Choerilus; for then the 
proposition is likely to become clearer. 

In dialectics, syllogism should be employed in reasoning against 
dialecticians rather than against the crowd: induction, on the 
other hand, is most useful against the crowd. This point has 
been treated previously as well.’ In induction, it is possible in 
some cases to ask the question in its universal form, but in 
others this is not easy, because there is no established general 
term that covers all the resemblances: in this case, when people 
need to secure the universal, they use the phrase ‘in all cases of 
this sort’. But it is one of the very hardest things to distinguish 
which of the things adduced are ‘of this sort’, and which are 
not: and in this connexion people often throw dust in each 
others’ eyes in their discussion, the one party asserting the 
likeness of things that are not alike, and the other disputing the 
likeness of things that are. One ought, therefore, to try oneself 
to coin a word to cover all things of the given sort, so as to leave 
no opportunity either to the answerer to dispute, and say that 
the thing advanced does not answer to a like description, or to 
the questioner to suggest falsely that it does answer to a like 
description, for many things appear to answer to like 
descriptions that do not really do so. 

If one has made an induction on the strength of several cases 
and yet the answerer refuses to grant the universal proposition, 
then it is fair to demand his objection. But until one has oneself 
stated in what cases it is so, it is not fair to demand that he 
shall say in what cases it is not so: for one should make the 
induction first, and then demand the objection. One ought, 


moreover, to claim that the objections should not be brought in 
reference to the actual subject of the proposition, unless that 
subject happen to be the one and only thing of the kind, as for 
instance two is the one prime number among the even 
numbers: for, unless he can say that this subject is unique of its 
kind, the objector ought to make his objection in regard to some 
other. People sometimes object to a universal proposition, and 
bring their objection not in regard to the thing itself, but in 
regard to some homonym of it: thus they argue that a man can 
very well have a colour or a foot or a hand other than his own, 
for a painter may have a colour that is not his own, and a cook 
may have a foot that is not his own. To meet them, therefore, 
you should draw the distinction before putting your question in 
such cases: for so long as the ambiguity remains undetected, so 
long will the objection to the proposition be deemed valid. If, 
however, he checks the series of questions by an objection in 
regard not to some homonym, but to the actual thing asserted, 
the questioner should withdraw the point objected to, and form 
the remainder into a universal proposition, until he secures 
what he requires; e.g. in the case of forgetfulness and having 
forgotten: for people refuse to admit that the man who has lost 
his knowledge of a thing has forgotten it, because if the thing 
alters, he has lost knowledge of it, but he has not forgotten it. 
Accordingly the thing to do is to withdraw the part objected to, 
and assert the remainder, e.g. that if a person have lost 
knowledge of a thing while it still remains, he then has 
forgotten it. One should similarly treat those who object to the 
statement that ‘the greater the good, the greater the evil that is 
its opposite’: for they allege that health, which is a less good 
thing than vigour, has a greater evil as its opposite: for disease 
is a greater evil than debility. In this case too, therefore, we have 
to withdraw the point objected to; for when it has been 
withdrawn, the man is more likely to admit the proposition, e.g. 
that ‘the greater good has the greater evil as its opposite, unless 


the one good involves the other as well’, as vigour involves 
health. This should be done not only when he formulates an 
objection, but also if, without so doing, he refuses to admit the 
point because he foresees something of the kind: for if the point 
objected to be withdrawn, he will be forced to admit the 
proposition because he cannot foresee in the rest of it any case 
where it does not hold true: if he refuse to admit it, then when 
asked for an objection he certainly will be unable to render one. 
Propositions that are partly false and partly true are of this type: 
for in the case of these it is possible by withdrawing a part to 
leave the rest true. If, however, you formulate the proposition on 
the strength of many cases and he has no objection to bring, 
you may claim that he shall admit it: for a premiss is valid in 
dialectics which thus holds in several instances and to which 
no objection is forthcoming. 

Whenever it is possible to reason to the same conclusion either 
through or without a reduction per impossibile, if one is 
demonstrating and not arguing dialectically it makes no 
difference which method of reasoning be adopted, but in 
argument with another reasoning per impossibile should be 
avoided. For where one has reasoned without the reduction per 
impossibile, no dispute can arise; if, on the other hand, one does 
reason to an impossible conclusion, unless its falsehood is too 
plainly manifest, people deny that it is impossible, so that the 
questioners do not get what they want. 

One should put forward all propositions that hold true of 
several cases, and to which either no objection whatever 
appears or at least not any on the surface: for when people 
cannot see any case in which it is not so, they admit it for true. 

The conclusion should not be put in the form of a question; if it 
be, and the man shakes his head, it looks as if the reasoning 
had failed. For often, even if it be not put as a question but 


advanced as a consequence, people deny it, and then those who 
do not see that it follows upon the previous admissions do not 
realize that those who deny it have been refuted: when, then, 
the one man merely asks it as a question without even saying 
that it so follows, and the other denies it, it looks altogether as if 
the reasoning had failed. 

Not every universal question can form a dialectical proposition 
as ordinarily understood, e.g. ‘What is man?’ or ‘How many 
meanings has «the good»?’ For a dialectical premiss must be of 
a form to which it is possible to reply ‘Yes’ or ‘No’, whereas to 
the aforesaid it is not possible. For this reason questions of this 
kind are not dialectical unless the questioner himself draws 
distinctions or divisions before expressing them, e.g. ‘Good 
means this, or this, does it not?’ For questions of this sort are 
easily answered by a Yes or a No. Hence one should endeavour 
to formulate propositions of this kind in this form. It is at the 
same time also perhaps fair to ask the other man how many 
meanings of ‘the good’ there are, whenever you have yourself 
distinguished and formulated them, and he will not admit them 
at all. 

Any one who keeps on asking one thing for a long time is a bad 
inquirer. For if he does so though the person questioned keeps 
on answering the questions, clearly he asks a large number of 
questions, or else asks the same question a large number of 
times: in the one case he merely babbles, in the other he fails to 
reason: for reasoning always consists of a small number of 
premisses. If, on the other hand, he does it because the person 
questioned does not answer the questions, he is at fault in not 
taking him to task or breaking off the discussion. 


There are certain hypotheses upon which it is at once difficult 
to bring, and easy to stand up to, an argument. Such (e.g.) are 
those things which stand first and those which stand last in the 
order of nature. For the former require definition, while the 
latter have to be arrived at through many steps if one wishes to 
secure a continuous proof from first principles, or else all 
discussion about them wears the air of mere sophistry: for to 
prove anything is impossible unless one begins with the 
appropriate principles, and connects inference with inference 
till the last are reached. Now to define first principles is just 
what answerers do not care to do, nor do they pay any attention 
if the questioner makes a definition: and yet until it is clear 
what it is that is proposed, it is not easy to discuss it. This sort 
of thing happens particularly in the case of the first principles: 
for while the other propositions are shown through these, these 
cannot be shown through anything else: we are obliged to 
understand every item of that sort by a definition. The 
inferences, too, that lie too close to the first principle are hard to 
treat in argument: for it is not possible to bring many arguments 
in regard to them, because of the small number of those steps, 
between the conclusion and the principle, whereby the 
succeeding propositions have to be shown. The hardest, 
however, of all definitions to treat in argument are those that 
employ terms about which, in the first place, it is uncertain 
whether they are used in one sense or several, and, further, 
whether they are used literally or metaphorically by the definer. 
For because of their obscurity, it is impossible to argue upon 
such terms; and because of the impossibility of saying whether 
this obscurity is due to their being used metaphorically, it is 
impossible to refute them. 

In general, it is safe to suppose that, whenever any problem 
proves intractable, it either needs definition or else bears either 


several senses, or a metaphorical sense, or it is not far removed 
from the first principles; or else the reason is that we have yet 
to discover in the first place just this – in which of the aforesaid 
directions the source of our difficulty lies: when we have made 
this clear, then obviously our business must be either to define 
or to distinguish, or to supply the intermediate premisses: for it 
is through these that the final conclusions are shown. 

It often happens that a difficulty is found in discussing or 
arguing a given position because the definition has not been 
correctly rendered: e.g. ‘Has one thing one contrary or many?’: 
here when the term ‘contraries’ has been properly defined, it is 
easy to bring people to see whether it is possible for the same 
thing to have several contraries or not: in the same way also 
with other terms requiring definition. It appears also in 
mathematics that the difficulty in using a figure is sometimes 
due to a defect in definition; e.g. in proving that the line which 
cuts the plane parallel to one side divides similarly both the line 
which it cuts and the area; whereas if the definition be given, 
the fact asserted becomes immediately clear: for the areas have 
the same fraction subtracted from them as have the sides: and 
this is the definition of ‘the same ratio’. The most primary of the 
elementary principles are without exception very easy to show, 
if the definitions involved, e.g. the nature of a line or of a circle, 
be laid down; only the arguments that can be brought in regard 
to each of them are not many, because there are not many 
intermediate steps. If, on the other hand, the definition of the 
starting-points be not laid down, to show them is difficult and 
may even prove quite impossible. The case of the significance of 
verbal expressions is like that of these mathematical 
conceptions. 

One may be sure then, whenever a position is hard to discuss, 
that one or other of the aforesaid things has happened to it. 
Whenever, on the other hand, it is a harder task to argue to the 


point claimed, i.e. the premiss, than to the resulting position, a 
doubt may arise whether such claims should be admitted or 
not: for if a man is going to refuse to admit it and claim that you 
shall argue to it as well, he will be giving the signal for a harder 
undertaking than was originally proposed: if, on the other hand, 
he grants it, he will be giving the original thesis credence on the 
strength of what is less credible than itself. If, then, it is 
essential not to enhance the difficulty of the problem, he had 
better grant it; if, on the other hand, it be essential to reason 
through premisses that are better assured, he had better refuse. 
In other words, in serious inquiry he ought not to grant it, 
unless he be more sure about it than about the conclusion; 
whereas in a dialectical exercise he may do so if he is merely 
satisfied of its truth. Clearly, then, the circumstances under 
which such admissions should be claimed are different for a 
mere questioner and for a serious teacher. 

As to the formulation, then, and arrangement of one’s 
questions, about enough has been said. 

With regard to the giving of answers, we must first define what 
is the business of a good answerer, as of a good questioner. The 
business of the questioner is so to develop the argument as to 
make the answerer utter the most extrvagant paradoxes that 
necessarily follow because of his position: while that of the 
answerer is to make it appear that it is not he who is 
responsible for the absurdity or paradox, but only his position: 
for one may, perhaps, distinguish between the mistake of taking 
up a wrong position to start with, and that of not maintaining it 
properly, when once taken up. 


Inasmuch as no rules are laid down for those who argue for the 
sake of training and of examination: – and the aim of those 
engaged in teaching or learning is quite different from that of 
those engaged in a competition; as is the latter from that of 
those who discuss things together in the spirit of inquiry: for a 
learner should always state what he thinks: for no one is even 
trying to teach him what is false; whereas in a competition the 
business of the questioner is to appear by all means to produce 
an effect upon the other, while that of the answerer is to appear 
unaffected by him; on the other hand, in an assembly of 
disputants discussing in the spirit not of a competition but of 
an examination and inquiry, there are as yet no articulate rules 
about what the answerer should aim at, and what kind of things 
he should and should not grant for the correct or incorrect 
defence of his position: – inasmuch, then, as we have no 
tradition bequeathed to us by others, let us try to say something 
upon the matter for ourselves. 

The thesis laid down by the answerer before facing the 
questioner’s argument is bound of necessity to be one that is 
either generally accepted or generally rejected or else is neither: 
and moreover is so accepted or rejected either absolutely or else 
with a restriction, e.g. by some given person, by the speaker or 
by some one else. The manner, however, of its acceptance or 
rejection, whatever it be, makes no difference: for the right way 
to answer, i.e. to admit or to refuse to admit what has been 
asked, will be the same in either case. If, then, the statement 
laid down by the answerer be generally rejected, the conclusion 
aimed at by the questioner is bound to be one generally 
accepted, whereas if the former be generally accepted, the latter 


is generally rejected: for the conclusion which the questioner 
tries to draw is always the opposite of the statement laid down. 
If, on the other hand, what is laid down is generally neither 
rejected nor accepted, the conclusion will be of the same type 
as well. Now since a man who reasons correctly demonstrates 
his proposed conclusion from premisses that are more 
generally accepted, and more familiar, it is clear that (1) where 
the view laid down by him is one that generally is absolutely 
rejected, the answerer ought not to grant either what is thus 
absolutely not accepted at all, or what is accepted indeed, but 
accepted less generally than the questioner’s conclusion. For if 
the statement laid down by the answerer be generally rejected, 
the conclusion aimed at by the questioner will be one that is 
generally accepted, so that the premisses secured by the 
questioner should all be views generally accepted, and more 
generally accepted than his proposed conclusion, if the less 
familiar is to be inferred through the more familiar. 
Consequently, if any of the questions put to him be not of this 
character, the answerer should not grant them. (2) If, on the 
other hand, the statement laid down by the answerer be 
generally accepted without qualification, clearly the conclusion 
sought by the questioner will be one generally rejected without 
qualification. Accordingly, the answerer should admit all views 
that are generally accepted and, of those that are not generally 
accepted, all that are less generally rejected than the conclusion 
sought by the questioner. For then he will probably be thought 
to have argued sufficiently well. (3) Likewise, too, if the 
statement laid down by the answerer be neither rejected 
generally nor generally accepted; for then, too, anything that 
appears to be true should be granted, and, of the views not 
generally accepted, any that are more generally accepted than 
the questioner’s conclusion; for in that case the result will be 
that the arguments will be more generally accepted. If, then, the 
view laid down by the answerer be one that is generally 


accepted or rejected without qualification, then the views that 
are accepted absolutely must be taken as the standard of 
comparison: whereas if the view laid down be one that is not 
generally accepted or rejected, but only by the answerer, then 
the standard whereby the latter must judge what is generally 
accepted or not, and must grant or refuse to grant the point 
asked, is himself. If, again, the answerer be defending some one 
else’s opinion, then clearly it will be the latter’s judgement to 
which he must have regard in granting or denying the various 
points. This is why those, too, who introduce other’s opinions, 

e.g. that ‘good and evil are the same thing, as Heraclitus says,’ 
refuse to admit the impossibility of contraries belonging at the 
same time to the same thing; not because they do not 
themselves believe this, but because on Heraclitus’ principles 
one has to say so. The same thing is done also by those who 
take on the defence of one another’s positions; their aim being 
to speak as would the man who stated the position. 
It is clear, then, what the aims of the answerer should be, 
whether the position he lays down be a view generally accepted 
without qualification or accepted by some definite person. Now 
every question asked is bound to involve some view that is 
either generally held or generally rejected or neither, and is also 
bound to be either relevant to the argument or irrelevant: if 
then it be a view generally accepted and irrelevant, the 
answerer should grant it and remark that it is the accepted 
view: if it be a view not generally accepted and irrelevant, he 
should grant it but add a comment that it is not generally 
accepted, in order to avoid the appearance of being a simpleton. 
If it be relevant and also be generally accepted, he should admit 





