 GREGORIO, By Percy Hemingway





I—AT THE PARADISO

The Cafe Paradiso was full of people, for the inhabitants of Alexandria had dined, and the opera season was over. The seats at every table were occupied, and the fumes of smoke from a hundred cigars partly hid the ladies of the orchestra. As the waiters pushed aside the swing-doors of the buffet and staggered into the salon with whisky, absinthe, and coffee, the click of billiard-balls was heard. The windows facing the sea were wide open, for the heat was intense, and the murmur of the waves mingled with the plaintive voices of the violins.

Seated by a table at the far end of the hall, Gregorio Livadas hummed softly an accompaniment to Suppe's "Poete et Paysan," puffing from time to time a cloudlet of blue smoke from his mouth. When the music ceased he joined in the applause, leaning back happily in his chair as the musicians prepared to repeat the last movement. Meanwhile his eyes wandered idly over the faces of his neighbors.

When the last chord was struck he saw the women hurry down from the platform and rush toward the tables where their acquaintances sat. He heard them demand beer and coffee, and they drank eagerly, for fiddling in that heat was thirsty work. He watched the weary waiters hastening from table to table, and he heard the voices around him grow more animated and the laughter more frequent. One man was fastening a spray of flowers on the ample bosom of the flautiste, while another sipped the brown lager from the glass of the big drum, and the old wife of the conductor left her triangle and cymbals to beg some roses from an Arab flower-girl. Truly the world was enjoying itself, and Gregorio smiled dreamily, for the sight of so much gaiety pleased him. He wished one of the women would come and talk to him; he would have liked to chat with the fair-haired girl who played the first violin so well. He began to wonder why she preferred that ugly Englishman with his red face and bald head. He caught snatches of their conversation. Bah! how uninteresting it was! for they could barely understand each other. What pleasure did she find in listening to his bad French? and in her native Hungarian he could not even say, "I love." Why had she not come to him, Gregorio Livadas, who could talk to her well and would not mumble like an idiot and look red and uncomfortable! Then he saw she was drinking champagne, and he sighed. Ah, yes, these English were rich, and women only cared for money; they were unable to give up their luxuries for the sake of a man.

But at this thought Gregorio blushed a little. After all, there was one woman—the only woman he ought to think of—who was not afraid of hardship for the sake of her husband. He tried to excuse himself by arguing that the music had excited him; but he felt a little ashamed, and as a sop to his not yet quite murdered conscience got up and left the cafe.

When he turned into the Place Mehemet Ali he remembered suddenly that he had wasted his evening. It was ten o'clock, too late to set about the business he had intended. He was angry with himself now as well as ashamed. He wandered up and down the square, looking at the statue of the great khedive, silhouetted against the moonlight, and cursed at his misfortunes.

Why should he, Gregorio Livadas, be in need of money? He had worked hard, but without success. He could have borne his ill luck had he alone been the sufferer, but he must consider his child—and, of course, his wife too. He was really fond of his wife in a way. But he smiled proudly as he thought of his son, for whom he schemed out a great future. He and Xantippe would train the boy so carefully that he would grow up to be a great man, and, what was more, a rich man. How they would laugh, all three, as they sat in the splendid cafes over their wine, at the hardships the father had endured! Still he must not forget the present, and he sorely needed money. He would go to Amos again. Amos was a rich man, very rich, and a filthy Jew. Amos could easily spare him some money and renew the last loan. He was going to be successful now and would be able to pay good interest. What better investment could Amos have? Surely none. He was going to set up a cafe with the money at Tanta, or Zagazig, or even Benhur,—yes, Benhur was the best,—where there were few competitors. Then he would make a fortune, as other Greeks had done, and Amos would be paid in full. He was not extravagant, no; he had the business instincts of his race. Half these rich merchants of Alexandria had begun as he would begin; he would succeed as they had succeeded. The future was really hopeful, if he could only borrow a little capital.

With these thoughts surging through his brain Gregorio paced up and down the pavements. At last he turned into the Rue des Soeurs and started slowly toward his home.

This street, the sink of Alexandria, was at its gayest. The cafes where cheap liquor is sold were crowded. Soldiers and sailors, natives and the riffraff of half a dozen nations, jostled one another. The twanging of guitars and the tinkling of pianos was heard from every house. Women, underclothed and overpainted, leaned from the upper windows and made frequent sallies into the street to capture their prey. Loud voices sang lusty English choruses and French chansonnettes, and Neapolitan songs tried to assert themselves whenever the uproar ceased for a moment. Every one talked his, or her, own tongue, and gesture filled in the gaps when words were wanting. All seemed determined to degrade themselves as much as possible, and nearly every one seemed supremely happy.

Occasionally there was a fight, and knives were used with unerring skill; but the mounted police who patrolled the streets, though overtaxed, managed to preserve a certain amount of order.

Gregorio took very little notice of the scenes through which he passed. He knew every inch and corner of the quarter that had been his home for years, and was familiar with most of its inhabitants. He sighed a little as he thought of the money being lost and won in the stuffy ill-lighted rooms at the back of the houses, shut out from view of the authorities. Like most of his race, he was fond of the excitement of gambling. But of what use were regrets and sighs? he had no money, and must needs go home. It was vain to try and borrow or to ask credit for his losses; in these gambling hells what is lost must be immediately paid, for tempers are inflamed by drink and knives are worn at each player's belt.

But he sighed, none the less, at the hard necessity that compelled him to pass down the street without once entering the doors of a tavern. It was very hot, and he had smoked many cigarettes. He would have been glad to call for a drink. The tavern-keepers, though they were his friends, expected to be paid. One or two women beckoned to him, who would have willingly offered him wine, but he was proud enough to ignore them.

He became more moody and dejected as he went along, silent and sober amid so much revelry. When he reached his house he saw a drunken man lying on the threshold asleep. He stooped to look into his face and recognised an Englishman, the foreman of some tramp in the harbour. He kicked the recumbent form testily as he strode over it.

"These English, what beasts they are!" he growled, "and I—I have not a piastre for a single glass of wine."





II—CONCERNING A DEBT

Gregorio found, on entering his house, that his wife was already in bed. He went into the tiny kitchen and saw a plate of macaroni ready for his supper. He tried to eat some, but it stuck in his throat. He took a bottle of cheap Cretan wine from a shelf and drank from it; but the wine was sour, and he spat it from his mouth with a curse.

Taking up the lamp, he went into the bedroom. His wife was fast asleep with the boy in her arms. For a moment a smile flickered round Gregorio's mouth as he looked at them. Then he took off his boots and his coat, blew out the lamp, and lay beside them. He was very tired after his long tramp in the hot streets, but he could not sleep. Angrily he tossed from side to side and closed his eyes tightly; but it was no good, sleep would not come.

At midnight he heard a call to prayer chanted from the minaret of a tiny mosque in the neighbourhood. The muezzin's voice irritated him. He did not wish to pray, and he did want to sleep. He swore that it was insanity for these fools of Mohammedans to declare that prayer was better than sleep.

Then the thoughts that had agitated him during the walk returned to him. The Rue des Soeurs was still noisy with merry-makers, and it seemed to him that if he could only join them he would be happy. But he had no money, and one can do nothing without money!

Then there came back to him the face of the Englishman he had seen talking to the violinist of the Paradiso. He hated the man because he was ugly and rich. These English were all rich, and yet they seemed to him a miserable race, mere ignorant bullies. He remembered how often he had come to the help of the English travellers who filled Egypt. Why had he, he asked himself, for the sake of a miserable reward, prevented them being cheated, when he, with all his talents, was condemned to starve? Even his child, he thought, would grow to hate him if he remained poor. He must get money. Amos would have to lend him some. The Jews were unpopular among the Greeks; it were wise to keep on good terms with them, as Amos would find out.

At last he fell asleep.

In the morning his troubles began again. There was no coffee, and only a little Arab bread, and when that was done they must starve if they could not get some money. Gregorio tore off a bit of bread and ate it slowly, looking at his wife, who sat weeping beside him.

"I shall go to Amos," he said, firmly.

"Ah, yes, to Amos," Xantippe answered quietly; "but it will be no good."

"Why no good?"

"Because you owe him money, and he will give you no more till he is paid."

"But we cannot pay him. He must let us have some. If not—" and Gregorio raised threatening.

His wife smiled sadly and kissed him.

"You will not frighten Amos, my love. When I told him the child had been ill, he only laughed."

"When was that?"

"Yesterday."

"Then he had been here?"

"He came last night to ask for his money. I told him we had none, and he laughed and said we must get some. He told me I might get some if I cared to. He said I could make, oh, so much!"

Gregorio scowled savagely. "The filthy Jew! he said that? Never, never, never!"

"But we must get some money," the woman sobbed, "if only for our son's sake, Gregorio. But not that way?"

"No, not that way," he replied, savagely.

"When shall you go to him?"

"Now."

And taking up his hat he rushed into the street. He was terribly angry, not so much at the purport of the Jew's speech as at the man who made it. He loathed the Jews, and felt insulted when spoken to by one; it was a terrible matter to ask this man for help, but it was intolerable that his wife should suffer insult. And yet the child must be fed. Yes, she had said that, and it was true. They must make sacrifices for the child.

He soon reached the Jew's house, and was shown by a richly clad servant into the room where Amos sat. Amos was an old man, tall and strong, with a long bushy beard, in which his fingers continually played; and his eyes were sharp and brilliant and restless, a strange contrast to his stately bearing and measured movements. He rose from his cushions as Gregorio entered, and saluted him courteously, motioning him to a seat. Then, having resettled himself, he clapped his hands together smartly and ordered the servant who answered the summons to bring in coffee and pipes.

Gregorio was rather overawed at the luxury he saw around him, and he felt the stern-looking, polite old man would be a difficult person to deal with. As he puffed at his tube he considered carefully what words he should use.

For some time neither spoke, but Amos was the first to break the silence.

"You heard I was at your house last night, and so have come to pay me?"

"Yes, I heard you were at my house and that you wanted to be paid. You are a rich man, and I am poor."

"Nay, I am not rich; they lie who say I am rich."

"It is twenty pounds I owe you, is it not?"

"Yes, twenty pounds. It is a large sum, and I have dealt generously with you. I am now in need of it myself."

"I am a poor man."

"You have not the money, eh, my friend?"

"I have not the money. But I will pay you if you will lend me some more. I shall be successful now; only twenty pounds more."

Amos appeared unmoved at the tremor in Gregorio's voice. His eyes rested coldly on the face of his client, while the unfortunate Greek continued to speak rapidly of his troubles and hopes. He smiled sarcastically as Gregorio spoke of the certainty of making his fortune at Benhur, and remained quite unmoved at the story of the sufferings of a woman and child from hunger and want.

"Your wife is beautiful," was all he answered when Gregorio paused for a moment. At these words, however, he half rose from his place and clinched his hands savagely. But he sank back again with the remembrance that a show of temper would not advance his cause.

"Very beautiful," he answered, chokingly; "would you see her starve?"

"She is not my wife," said Amos, quietly. Then he continued slowly, pausing at intervals to puff out a cloud of smoke from his mouth:

"You have owed me this money a long time. I want it, and I will have it. Even in Egypt there is law. You do not like us Jews, but the law will protect me as long as I am rich enough to buy justice. In three days you will pay me this money. I have been generous to you; now I will be generous no longer. If I am not paid I will take measures to recover my loss. You will sleep in the streets like the Arabs, my friend; but the weather is warm. It is early summer, so you will scarcely feel the exposure. In three days you will come and pay me."

"But how am I to get the money? If you would lend me only a few pounds I would repay you all I owe."

"Already you owe me more than you can pay. You can make money. You are married. These Christian women are worse than the Arabs; do I not see them as I come home in the evening from my business? It is not right to borrow and not repay. I need my money. How can I have my coffee and my pipe unless I have money?"

Gregorio listened with growing anger, and finally rose from his seat and shook his fist in the old man's face.

"You shall be paid," he shouted, "you shall be paid!"

"Anger is useless, my friend."

And as Gregorio left the house Amos smiled and stroked his beard. "Truly," he thought, "these Christians hate us, but we have them in our power. It is pleasant to be hated and yet to know that it is to us they must cringe when they are in need; and it is very pleasant to refuse. My friend Gregorio is not happy now that he is struggling in my grasp."

As for Gregorio, he wandered away toward the harbour, kicking savagely at the refuse scattered along the pavement. He did not know how to set about earning the requisite sum. It was no good applying to the hotels or tourist agencies, for there were few visitors in the city and dragomen were therefore not needed.

His friends were too poor to help him, and the consul was unable to do much for him, there were so many poor Greeks who wanted help. Meanwhile there was no food at home and no drink; even the necessaries of life were lacking.

On arriving at his home he found his wife and child huddled in a corner crying for food. They ran toward him as he entered, but the hope in their faces quickly faded at the sight of him.

"It's no good," Gregorio growled; "Amos refuses to advance a piastre and says I must pay all I owe in three days."

"It is impossible to sleep when one is hungry," said Gregorio that night to his wife, who lay awake, weeping, beside him.





III—OF FAILURE AND A RESOLVE

Gregorio's dreams, when he did sleep, were none of the pleasantest, and when he woke up, from time to time, he heard his wife weeping. In wondering what he should say to comfort her he fell asleep again, and sleeping was worse than lying awake. For in his dreams he saw Xantippe and his child starving and crying for food, and he was unable to help them in any way. He lived over again the long day he had spent tramping the streets of Alexandria searching for work. He saw the few tourists still left in the town fat and happy; he saw the porters of the hotels who had smiled on him pityingly and yet contemptuously; and he woke, after each representation of the crude comedy, hot and yet cold with perspiration, to feel the bed on which he lay shaking under the sobs of his wife.

When at last day dawned Gregorio raised himself with an oath, and swore to find food for his family and work for himself. The terrible debt he owed to Amos he swore should not trouble him, laughing at his wife's remonstrances. With the bright daylight had come a new courage, and, hungry as he was, he felt able not only to satisfy their hunger, but so skilfully to arrange matters that they would never feel hungry again. Yet is was a terrible ordeal, that half-hour when the family should have sat down to a table laden with food. The poor wife cried, and he had to comfort her tears with promises, unsubstantial nutriment indeed, and they could not satisfy the child, who failed dismally to understand them. Through the green blinds came the noise of life and health and merriment; curses too, sometimes, but only the curses of the well fed, and therefore meaningless. Already the sun fell hot and indomitable on the room, and the atmosphere at their touch became stifling. Gregorio, swallowing his tears, tore out into the street, shouting up the narrow stairway hysterical words of hope.

How long and shadowless the street seemed! Every house had its green blinds closely shut; the wind that stirred the dust of the pavements was hot and biting. Gregorio clinched his hands and strode rapidly onward. What mattered it to him that behind those green blinds women and men slumbered in comparative comfort? He had a work to do, and by sunset must carry good tidings to his little world. For a time his heart was brave as the dry wind scorched the tear upon his cheek. "Surely," he thought, weaving his thoughts into a fine marching rhythm, "the great God will help me now, will help me now."

At midday, after he had tried, with that strange Greek pertinacity that understands no refusals, all the hotels and tourist agencies he had called at the day before, he became weary and disconsolate. The march had become a dirge; no longer it suggested happiness to be, but failure. An Englishman threw him a piastre, and he turned into a cafe. Calling for a glass of wine, he flung himself down on the wooden bench and tried to think. But really logical thinking was impossible. For in spite of the sorrow at his heart, the same bright dreams of wealth and happiness came back to mock him. The piastre he played with became gold, and he felt the cafe contained no luxuries that he might not command to be brought before him. But as the effects of the red wine of Lebanon evaporated he began to take a soberer though still cheerful view of his position. It was only when the waiter carried off his piastre that he suddenly woke to fact and knew himself once more a man with a wife and child starving in Alexandria, an alien city for all its wealthy colony of Greeks. A wave of pity swept over him; not so much for the woman was he sorry, though he loved her too, but for the baby whose future he had planned. He scowled savagely at the inmates of the cafe, who only smiled quietly, for they were used to poor Greeks who had drunk away their last coin, and pushed past them into the street.

There it was hotter than ever, and he met scarcely any one. Every one who could be was at home, or in the cool cafes; only Gregorio was abroad. He determined to make for the quay. He knew that many ships put into the Alexandrian waters, and there was often employment found for those not too proud to work at lading and unloading. Quickly, and burning as the kempsin, he hurried through the Rue des Soeurs, not daring to look up at the house wherein he dwelt. The muffled sounds of voices and guitars from the far-away interiors seemed to mock his footsteps as he passed the wine-shops; and all the other houses were silent and asleep. At last he arrived on the quay, and the black lines of the P. and O. stood out firmly before him against the pitiless blue of sea and sky. He wandered over the hot stone causeway, but found no one. The revenue officers were away, and not a labourer, not a sailor, was visible. Beyond the breakwater little tufts of silvery foam flashed on the rollers, and a solitary steamer steered steadily for the horizon. He could see the Greek flag at her stern, and his eyes filled with tears. Ah, how little his friends in Athens thought of the man who had come to find fame and fortune in the far-off East! He sat down on the parapet and watched the vessel until she became a tiny speck on the horizon, and then he recommenced his search for work. His heart was braver for a moment because of its pangs; he swore he would show these countrymen of his who dwelt at home, and who in three days would see the very ship he had been gazing at arrive in Grecian waters, that he was worthy of his country and his kinsfolk.

But resolutions were useless, tenacity of purpose was useless. For two long hours he wandered by the harbour, but met no one.

At last the sun fell behind the western waves, and the windows of the khedive's palace glowed like a hundred flaming eyes; the flags fell from the masts of the vessels; on the city side was a sudden silence, save for the melancholy voices of the muezzins; then the day died; the bright stars, suddenly piercing the heavens, mocked him with their brilliance and told him that his useless search for bread was over.

Gregorio went back slowly to his home. Already the Rue des Soeurs was crowded. The long street rang with music and laughter, and instead of blinds covering the windows merry women leaned upon the sills and laughed at the crowds below.

Gregorio, when he reached his house, would have liked to go straight to bed. But it was not to be, for as he entered the tiny room he heard his wife trying to persuade the hungry infant into sleep, and his footsteps disturbed her tears. He had to calm them as best he could, and as he soothed her he noticed the child had a crust in his hand which he gnawed half contentedly. At the same moment the dim blue figure of an Arab passed by the opposite wall, and had almost gained the door ere Gregorio found words.

"Who are you?"

"It is Ahmed," his wife answered, gently, placing her trembling hand upon his shoulder; "he too has children."

Gregorio scowled and muttered, "An Arab," and in that murmur none of the loathing was hidden that the pseudo-West bears for the East.

"The child is starving," said Ahmed. "I have saved the child; maybe some day I shall save the father." And Ahmed slipped away before Gregorio could answer him.

For a while neither he nor his wife spoke; they stood silent in the moonlight. At last Gregorio asked huskily, "Have you had food?"

"Not to-day," was the answer; and the sweet voice was almost discordant in its pathos as it continued, "nor drink, and but for Ahmed the boy had died."

Gregorio could not answer; there was a lump in his throat that blocked words, opening the gate for sobs. But he choked down his emotion with an effort and busied himself about the room. Xantippe sat watching him anxiously, smoothly with nervous fingers the covering of her son's bed.

As the night advanced the heat increased, and all that disturbed the silence of the room was the echo of the streets. Gregorio walked to the window and looked out. Below him he saw the jostling crowd of men and women. These people, he thought, were happy, and two miserables only dwelt in the city—his wife and himself. And whenever he asked himself what was the cause of his misery, the answer was ever the same—poverty. He glanced at his son, tossing uneasily in his bed; he looked at his wife, pale and haggard in the moonlight; he remembered his own sufferings all day long in the hot cruel streets, and he spoke unsteadily:

"Xantippe?"

"Yes."

"I have thought over things."

"And I too."

"We are starving,—you are starving, and I am starving,—and all day long I tramp these cursed streets, but gain nothing. So it will go on, day in, day out. Not only we ourselves, but our son too must die. We must save him."

"Yes," said Xantippe, quietly, repeating her husband's words as she kissed the forehead of her child, "we must save him."

"There is only one way."

"Only one way," repeated Xantippe, dreamily. There was a pause, and then, as though the words had grown to have a meaning to her that she could not fathom, she queried, "What way, Gregorio?"

"That," he said, roughly, as he caught her by the wrist, and, dragging her to the window, pointed to the women in the street beneath.

Xantippe hid her face on her husband's breast and cried softly, while she murmured, "No, no; I will never consent."

"Then the child will die," answered the Greek, curtly, flinging her from him.

And the poor woman cast herself upon the bed beside her boy, and when her tears ceased for a moment stammered, "When?"

"To-morrow," was the answer, cruel and peremptory. And as Gregorio closed the lattice, shutting out the noise of song and laughter, the room echoed with the mighty sobbing of a woman who was betrayed, and who repeated hysterically, while kissing the face of her child, "To-morrow, to-morrow there will be food for you."

And Gregorio slept peacefully, for the danger of starvation was over; he would yet live to see his son become rich.

And the woman?

He kissed her before he slept, and women always cry.





IV—CONCERNING TWO WOMEN

Gregorio felt a little bit ashamed of himself next morning. The excitement had passed, and the full meaning of his words came back to him and made him shudder. The sun, already risen, sent shafts of light between the lips of the wooden lattice. A faint sound of life and movement stole upward from the street below. But Xantippe and the boy still slumbered, though the woman's form shook convulsively at times, for she sobbed in her sleep.

Gregorio looked at the two for a minute and then raised himself with an oath. The woman's heavy breathing irritated him, for, after all, he argued, it was her duty as well as his to sacrifice herself for the lad. Moreover, the Jew must be paid, and to-day was that appointed by Amos for the settling of their account. There was no money to pay it with, and they must lose their furniture, so much at least was certain. But Amos would not have the best of the bargain, thought the Greek as he looked round the room with a grin, and the certainty that he had got the better of Amos for the moment cheered his spirits. Then, too, after to-day there would be plenty to eat, for his wife could manage to earn money; nor was the man so mean in his villainy as to shirk any effort to earn money himself. After first looking at his wife critically and with a satisfied smile, he touched her on the shoulder to wake her.

"I am going out for work," he said, as Xantippe opened her eyes.

"All right."

"Good-bye."

But Xantippe answered not. She turned her face to the wall wearily as Gregorio left her.

Entering the street he made straight for Amos's house, and told the porter, who was still lying on the trestle before the door, that he could not pay the Jew's bill. Then without waiting for an answer, he hurried off to the quay.

With better luck than on the previous day, he managed to obtain employment for some hours. The Greek mail-boat had arrived, and under the blazing sun he toiled good-humouredly and patiently. The work was hard, but it gave him no opportunity of thinking. He had to be continually dodging large bales of fruit and wine, and if he made a mistake the officer on duty would shout at him angrily, "Lazy dog! you would not have left Greece were you not an idle fellow." Such words wounded his pride, and he determined to do so well that he should earn praise. But the little officer, his bright buttons flashing in the sunlight, who smoked quietly in the intervals of silence, never praised anybody; but he left off abusing Gregorio at last, and when work ceased for the day bade him come again on the morrow.

At sunset Gregorio pocketed his few hard-earned piastres and wandered cityward. He did not care to go back to his home, for he knew there would be miserable stories to tell of the Jew's anger, and, moreover, he was terribly thirsty. So he went into a little cafe—known as the Penny-farthing Shop—opposite his house and called for a flask of kephisa. As he sipped the wine he glanced up nervously at his window and wondered whether his wife had already left home. Were he sure that she had, he would leave his wine untouched and hasten to look after his son and give him food. But until he knew Xantippe had gone he would not move. The sobs of yesterday still disturbed him, and he was more than once on the point of cancelling his resolves. But as the wine stirred his blood he became satisfied with what he had done and said. The little cafe at Benhur that was to make his fortune seemed nearly in his grasp. Had he not, he asked himself, worked all day without a murmur? It was right Xantippe should help him.

As he sat dreamily thinking over these things, and watching the shadows turn to a darker purple under the oil-lamps, a woman spoke to him.

"Well, Gregorio, are you asleep?"

"No," said he, turning toward his questioner.

The woman laughed. She was a big woman, dressed in loose folds of red and blue. Her hair was dishevelled, and ornamented with brass pins fastened into it at random. Her sleeves were rolled up to her armpits, and she had her arms akimbo—fat, flabby arms that shook as she laughed. Her eyes were almost hidden, she screwed them up so closely, but her wide mouth opened and disclosed a row of gigantic, flawless teeth.

Gregorio frowned as he looked at her. He knew her well and had never liked her. But he dare not quarrel with her, for he owed her money, and "for the love of his black eyes," as she told him, she had ever a bottle of wine ready for him when he wished.

"Well, my good woman," he blurted out, surlily, "you seem to be amused."

"I am, Gregorio. Tell me," she continued, slyly, seating herself beside him and placing her elbows on the table, "how is she?"

"Who?"

"Xantippe. She came to me to-day, and I saw she had been crying. But I said nothing, because it is not always wise to ask questions. I thought she wept because she was hungry and because the baby was hungry. I offered her food and she took some, but so little, scarcely enough to cover a ten-piastre piece. 'That is for the baby,' I said; 'now some for you.' But she refused."

"Perhaps she had food for herself," said Gregorio, shifting uneasily in his chair.

"Perhaps," said the woman, and laughed again, more loudly than ever, till the table shook. "But she asked me for something else," she continued, when her merriment languished for want of breath; "she asked me to let her have an old dress of mine, a bright yellow-and-red dress, and she borrowed some ornaments. It is not right of you, Gregorio, to keep an old friend on the door-step when you have a fantasia."

Gregorio scowled savagely. After a pause he said, "I don't know why my wife wanted your dress and ornaments."

"Oh yes, you do, friend Gregorio." And she laughed again, this time a suppressed, chuckling laugh that threatened to choke her; and she supported her chin on her hands, while her eyes peered through the enveloping fat at the man who sat opposite to her. Suddenly she stood up, and taking Gregorio by the arm dragged him to the door.

"See, there she goes. My garments are cleverly altered and suit her finely, don't they? Ah, well, my friend, a man who cannot support a wife should marry a woman who can support him."

Gregorio did not stop to answer her, but pushed past her into the street. The woman watched him enter the house opposite, and then returned quietly to her work. But there was a smile hovering round her lips as she murmured to herself, "Ah, well, in time."

Gregorio meanwhile had run up to his room and entered it breathless with excitement. The first glance told him that Amos had seized all he could, for nothing remained save a wooden bench and one or two coarse, half-disabled cooking utensils.

Gregorio swore a little as he realised what had happened. Then he saw in a corner by the window his son and Ahmed.

"She has gone," said Ahmed, as Gregorio's gaze rested on him. But she might have gone merely to market, or to see a neighbour, for all the imperturbable Arab face disclosed. As soon as he had spoken the man bent over the child, laughing softly as the youngster played with his beard. For the Arab, as he is miscalled, is fond of children, and there are none to whom children take so readily as to the Egyptian fellahin.

Gregorio watched the two for a moment, and then placing his remaining piastres in the man's hand bade him bring food and wine. As soon as he was left alone with his son, he flung himself down on the floor and kissed, "You shall be a great man, ay, a rich man, my son."

He repeated the sentence over and over again, punctuating it with kisses, while the two-year-old regarded him wonderingly, until Ahmed returned.

When the meal was ended Gregorio took the boy in his arms and sang to him softly till at last the infant slept. Then he placed him gently on the floor, having first made of his coat a bed, and went to the window and flung back the shutters. He smoked quietly as the minutes went by, waiting impatiently for his wife to return. It seemed to him monstrous that the boy who was to inherit a fortune should be sleeping on the dirty floor wrapped in an old coat; that an Arab, a mere fellah, should amuse his son and play with him, when Greek nurses were to be hired in Alexandria had one only the money. Long after midnight he heard a step on the stairs, and a minute after the door opened. He recognised his wife's footsteps, and he rose to meet her. As she came into the room she looked quickly round, and seeing her son went toward him and kissed him. Gregorio, half afraid, stood by the window watching her. She let her glance rest on him a minute, then she turned round and laid her cloak upon the floor.

"Xantippe!"

But she did not answer.

"Xantippe, I have fed our son. The good days are coming when we shall be rich and happy."

But Xantippe was too busy folding out the creases of her cloak to notice him. The moonlight streamed on to her, and her face shone like an angel's. Gregorio made one step toward her, ravished, for she had never appeared so beautiful to him. For the moment he forgot the whole hideous history of the last few days and the brief, horrible conversation of the night before. Fired with a desire to touch her, to kiss her, to whisper into her ear, in the soft Greek speech, all the endearments and tendernesses that had won her when he wooed her, he placed his hand upon her arm. As if stung by a venomous snake, the woman recoiled from his touch. With a quick movement she sprang back and flung at his face a handful of gold and silver coins.

"Take them; they're yours," she cried, huskily, and retreated into the farthest corner of the room.

With a savage curse Gregorio put his hand to his lips and wiped away the blood, for a heavy coin had cut him. Then he ran swiftly downstairs, and Xantippe, as she lay down wearily beside her boy, heard a woman laugh.





V—XANTIPPE LOOKS OUT OF THE WINDOW

The Penny-farthing Shop was full of customers, and Madam Marx, the fat woman who followed Gregorio to the bar, was for a long time busy attending to her clients. Some English war-ships had entered the harbour at sunset, and many of the sailors had lost no time in seeking out their favourite haunt. Most of them knew Madam Marx well, as a good-natured woman who gave them plenty to drink for their money, and secreted them from the eyes of the police when the liquor overpowered them. Consequently there was much laughter and shaking of hands, and many a rough jest, which Madam Marx responded to in broken English. Gregorio watched the sailors gloomily. He hated the English, for even their sailors seemed to have plenty of money, and he recalled the rich Englishman he had seen at the Cafe Paradiso, drinking champagne and buying flowers for the Hungarian woman who played the fiddle. The scene he had just left contrasted disagreeably with the fun and jollity that surrounded him. But he felt unable to shake off his gloom and annoyance, and Madam Marx's attentions irritated him. He felt that her eyes continually rested on him, that, however busy she might be, he was never out of her thoughts. Every few minutes she would come toward him with a bottle of wine and fill up his glass, saying, "Come, my friend; wine is good and will drown your troubles." And though he resented her patronage, knowing he could not pay, he nevertheless drank steadily.

Every few minutes he heard the sound of horses' hoofs on the hard roadway, and through the windows he saw the military police pass slowly on their rounds.

At last the strong drinks so amiably retailed by Madam Marx did their work, and the men lay about the floor asleep and breathing heavily. The silence succeeding the noise startled Gregorio from his sullen humour. Madam Marx came and sat beside him, weary as she was with her long labours, and talked volubly. The wine had mounted to his head, and he answered her in rapid sentences, accompanying his words with gesture and grimace. What he talked about he scarcely knew, but the woman laughed, and he took an insane delight in hearing her. Just before daylight he fell asleep, resting his head on his arms, that were spread across the table. Madam Marx kissed him as he slept, murmuring to herself contentedly, "Ah, well, in time."

When Gregorio woke the sun was high in the heavens, blazing out of a brazen sky. Clouds of dust swept past the door from time to time, and cut his neck and face as he stood on the threshold smoking lazily. It was too late to go down to the quay, for his place must have long ago been filled by another. He was not sorry, since he by no means desired to toil again under the hot sun; the heavy drinking of the night had made him lethargic, and he was so thirsty the heat nearly choked him. He called out to a water-carrier staggering along in the scanty shade on the opposite side of the street, and took eagerly a draught of water. He touched the pigskin with his hand, and it was hot. The water was warm and made him sick; he spat it from his mouth hastily, and hearing a laugh behind him, turned round and saw Madam Marx.

"See, here is some wine, my friend; leave the water for the Arabs."

Gregorio gratefully seized the flagon and let the wine trickle down his throat, while Madam Marx, with arms akimbo, stood patiently before him.

"I must go now," he said, as he handed back the half-emptied flask.

"Why?"

"Because I must get some work."

"It is not easy to get work in the summer."

"I know, but I must get some. I owe money to Amos."

"Yes, I know. But your wife is making money now."

The man scowled at her. "How do you know that? Before God, I swear that she is not."

"Come, come, Gregorio. You were drunk last night, and your tongue wagged pretty freely. It's not a bit of use being angry with me, because I only know what you've told me. Besides, I'm your friend, you know that."

Gregorio flushed angrily at the woman's words, but he knew quite well it was no use replying to them, for she was speaking only the truth. But the knowledge that he had betrayed his secret annoyed him. He had grown used to the facts and could look at them easily enough, but he had not reckoned on others also learning them.

He determined to go out and find work, or at any rate to tramp the streets pretending to look for something to do. The woman became intolerable to him, and the Penny-farthing Shop, reeking with the odour of stale tobacco and spilled liquor, poisoned him. He took up his hat brusquely and stepped into the street.

Madam Marx, standing at the door, laughed at him as she called out, "Good-bye, Gregorio; when will you come back?"

He did not answer, but the sound of her laughter followed him up the street, and he kicked angrily at the stones in his path.

At last he passed by the Ras-el-Tin barracks. He looked curiously at the English soldiers. Some were playing polo on the hard brown space to the left, and from the windows of the building men leaned out, their shirt-sleeves rolled up and their strong arms bared to the sun. They smoked short clay pipes, and innumerable little blue spiral clouds mounted skyward. Obviously the heat did not greatly inconvenience them, for they laughed and sang and drank oceans of beer.

The sight of them annoyed Gregorio. He looked at the pewter mugs shining in the sunlight. He eyed greedily the passage of one from hand to hand; and when one man, after taking a long pull, laughed and held it upside down to show him it was empty, he burst into an uncontrollable fit of anger, and shook his fist impotently at the soldiers, who chaffed him good-naturedly. As he went along by the stables, a friendly lancer, pitying him, probably, too, wearying of his own lonely watch, called to him, and offered him a drink out of a stone bottle. Gregorio drank again feverishly, and handed the bottle back to its owner with a grin, and passed on without a word. The soldier watched him curiously, but said nothing.

When he reached the lighthouse Gregorio flung himself on to the pebble-strewn sand and looked across the bay. The blue water, calm and unruffled as a sheet of glass, spread before him. The ships—Austrian Lloyd mail-boats, P. and O. liners, and grimy coal-hulks—lay motionless against the white side of the jetty.

The khedive's yacht was bright with bunting, and innumerable fishing-boats near the breakwater made grateful oases in the glare whereon his eyes might rest. But he heeded them not. Angrily he flung lumps of stone and sand into the wavelets at his feet, and pushed back his hat that his face might feel the full heat of the sun. Then he lit a cigarette and began to think.

But what was the good of thinking? The thoughts always formed themselves into the same chain and reached the same conclusion; and ever on the glassy surface of the Levantine sea a woman poised herself and laughed at him.

When the sun fell behind the horizon, and the breakwater, after dashing up one flash of gold, became a blue blur, Gregorio rose to go. As he walked back toward the Penny-farthing Shop he felt angry and unsatisfied. The whole day was wasted. He had done nothing to relieve his wife, nothing to pay off Amos. Madam met him at the door, a flask of wine in her hand. Against his will Gregorio entered her cafe and smiled, but his smile was sour and malevolent.

"You want cheering, my friend," said madam, laughing.

"I have found nothing to do," said Gregorio.

"Ah! I told you it would be hard. There are no tourists in Alexandria now. And it is foolish of you to tramp the streets looking for work that you will never find, when you have everything you can want here."

"Except money, and that's everything," put in Gregorio, bluntly.

"Even money, my friend. I have enough for two."

Madam Marx had played her trump card, and she watched anxiously the effect of her words. For a moment the man did not speak, but trifled with his cigarette tobacco, rolling it gently between his brown fingers. Then he said:

"You know I am in debt now, and I want to pay off all I owe, and leave here."

"Yes, that's true, but you won't pay off your debts by tramping the streets, and your little cafe at Benhur will be a long time building, I fancy. Meanwhile there is money to be made at the Penny-farthing Shop."

"What are your terms?" asked Gregorio, roughly.

The woman laughed, but did not answer. The stars were shining, and the kempsin that had blown all day was dead. It was cool sitting outside the door of the cafe under the little awning, and pleasant to watch the blue cigarette smoke float upward in the still air. Gregorio sat for a while silent, and the woman came and stood by him. "You know my terms," she whispered, and Gregorio smiled, took her hand, and kissed her. At that moment the blind of the opposite house was flung back. Xantippe leaned out of the window and saw them.





VI—BABY AND JEW

When the Penny-farthing Shop began to fill Gregorio disappeared quietly by the back door. He muttered a half-unintelligible answer to the men who were playing cards in the dim parlour through which he had to pass, who called to him to join them. Gaining the street, he wandered along till he reached the bazaars, intending to waste an hour or two until Xantippe should have left the house. Then he determined to go back and see the boy in whom all his hopes and ambitions were centered, who was the unconscious cause of his villainy and degradation.

There was a large crowd in the bazaars, for a Moolid was being celebrated. Jugglers, snake-charmers, mountebanks, gipsies, and dancing-girls attracted hundreds of spectators.

The old men sat in the shadows of their stalls, smoking and drinking coffee. They smiled gravely at the younger people, who jostled one another good-humouredly, laughing, singing, quarrelling like children. Across the roadway hung lamps of coloured glass and tiny red flags stamped with a white crescent and a star. Torches blazed at intervals, casting a flickering glow on the excited faces of the crowd.

Gregorio watched without much interest. He had seen a great many fantasias since he came to Egypt, and they were no longer a novelty to him. He was annoyed that a race of people whom he despised should be so merry when he himself had so many troubles to worry him. He would have liked to go into one of the booths where the girls danced, but he had no money, and he cursed at his stupidity in not asking the Marx woman for some. He no longer felt ashamed of himself, for he argued that he was the victim of circumstances. Still he wished Xantippe had not looked out of the window, though of course he could easily explain things to her. And Xantippe was really so angry the night before, explanations were better postponed for a time. "After all," he thought, "it really does not much matter. Once we get over our present difficulties we shall forget all we have gone through." This comfortable reflection had been doing duty pretty often the last day or two, and though Gregorio did not believe it a bit, he always felt it was a satisfactory conclusion, and one to be encouraged.

Meanwhile he would not meet Xantippe. That was a point upon which he had definitely made up his mind. As he strolled through the bazaars, putting into order his vagabond thoughts, in a tall figure a few yards in front of him he recognised Amos. Nervous, he halted, for he had no desire to be interviewed by the Jew, and yet no way of escape seemed possible.

Nodding affably to the proprietor, he sat down on the floor of a shop hard by and watched Amos. The old man was evidently interested, for he was laughing pleasantly, and bending down to look at something on the ground. What it was Gregorio could not see. A knot of people, also laughing, surrounded the Jew. Gregorio was curious to see what attracted them, but fearful of being recognised by the old man. However, after a few moments his impatience mastered him, and he stepped up to the group.

"What is it?" he asked one of the bystanders.

"Only a baby. It's lost, I think."

Gregorio pushed his way into the centre of the crowd and suddenly became white as death.

There, seated on the ground, was his own child, laughing and talking to himself in a queer mixture of Greek and Arabic. Amos was bending kindly over the youngster, giving him cakes and sweets, and making inquiries as to the parents.

A chill fear seized on Gregorio's heart. He could not have explained the cause, nor did he stay and try to explain it. Quickly he broke into the midst of the circle and, catching up the boy in his arms, ran swiftly away.

Having reached home, he kissed the boy passionately, sent for food to Madam Marx, and wept and laughed hysterically for an hour. After a time the boy slept, and Gregorio then paced up and down the room, smoking, and puffing great clouds of smoke from his mouth, trying to calm himself. But he could not throw off his excitement. He imagined the awful home-coming had he not been to the bazaar, and he wondered what he would have done then. A great joy possessed him to see his son safe, and a fierce desire filled him to know who had taken the child away. He longed for Xantippe's return that he might tell her. He forgot completely that he had dreaded seeing her earlier this evening. Then he began to wonder what Amos was doing at the fantasia, and why he was so interested in the boy. Perhaps, Amos would forgive the debt for love of the child. The idea pleased him, but he soon came to understand that it was untenable. Oftener, indeed, he shuddered as he recalled the old man's figure bent over the infant. A sense of danger to come overwhelmed him. In some way he felt that the old man and the child were to be brought together to work his, Gregorio's, ruin.

Suddenly he heard a footstep on the stairs. "Thank God!" he cried, as he ran to the door.

"Xantippe!"

But he recoiled as if shot, for as the door opened Amos entered. The Jew bowed politely to the Greek, but there was an unpleasant twinkle in his eyes as he spoke.

"You cannot offer me a seat, my friend, so I will stand. We have met already this evening."

Gregorio did not answer, but placed himself between the Jew and the child.

"I dare say you did not see me," the old man continued, quietly, "for you seemed excited. I suppose the child is yours. It was surely careless to let him stray so far from home."

"The child is mine."

"Ah, well, it is a happy chance that you recovered him so easily. And now to business."

"I am listening."

"I have already, as of course you know, been here to see you about the money you owe me. I was sorry you did not see fit to pay me, because I had to sell your furniture, and it was not worth much."

"I have no money to pay you, or I would have paid you long ago. I told you when I went to your house that I could not pay you."

"And yet, my friend, it is only fair that a man who borrows money should be prepared to pay it back."

"I could pay you back if you gave me time. But you have no heart, you Jews. What do you care if we starve, so long as—"

"Hush!" said Amos, gravely; "I have dealt fairly by you. But I will let you go free on one condition."

"And that is?"

"That you give me the child."

Gregorio stood speechless with horror and rage at the window, and the old man walked across the room to where the infant lay.

"I have no young son, Gregorio Livadas, and I will take yours. Not only will I forgive you the debt, but I will give you money. I want the child."

"By God, you shall not touch him!" cried Gregorio, suddenly finding voice for his passion.

He rushed furiously at Amos, gripped him by the throat, and flung him to the far side of the room. Then he stood by his child with his arms folded on his breast, his eyes flashing and his nostrils dilated. Amos quickly recovered himself, and, in a voice that scarcely trembled, again demanded his money.

"Go away," shouted Gregorio; "if you come here again, I will kill you. Twice now have I saved my boy from falling into your hands."

"I wish only to do you a service. You are a beggar, and I am rich enough, ask Heaven, to look after the child. Why should you abuse me because I offer to release you from your debts if you will let me take the child?"

Gregorio answered brusquely that the Jew should not touch the boy. "I will not have him made a Jew."

"Then you will pay me."

"I will not. I cannot."

"I shall take measures, my friend, to force you to pay me. I have not dealt harshly with you. I came here to help you, and you have insulted me and beaten me."

"Because you are a dog of a Jew, and you have tried to steal my son."

A nasty look came into the Jew's eyes,—a cold, cunning look,—and he was about to reply when the door opened and Xantippe entered. She was well dressed, and wore some ornaments of gold. Amos turned toward her, asking the man:

"This is your wife?"

But Gregorio told Xantippe rapidly the history of his adventures with the boy; and the woman, hearing them, moved quietly to the corner where he slept, and took him in her arms.

The Jew smiled. "I see," he said, "that madam has money. She has taken the advice I gave you the other day. Now I know that you can pay me, and if you do not within two days, Gregorio Livadas, you will repent the insults you have heaped on my head this night."

He walked quietly to the corner of the room, where Xantippe sat nursing the boy, touched the child gently on the forehead with his lips, and then went out.

For some minutes neither Xantippe nor Gregorio spoke, but the man rubbed the infant's forehead with his finger as if to wipe out the stain of the Jew's kiss.





VII—XANTIPPE SPEAKS OUT

At last the silence, roused only by the strident buzzing of the mosquitos, became unendurable. Gregorio gave a preparatory cough and opened his lips to speak, but the words refused to be born. He was unnerved. The odious visitor, the wearying day, the memory of Xantippe's face at the window, combined to make him fearful. He watched, under his half-closed lids, his wife crouching on the far side of the boy. Once or twice, as he was rubbing the youngster's forehead, his fingers touched those of his wife as she waved off the mosquitos; but at each contact with them he shivered and his fears increased. He tried, vainly, to get his thoughts straight, and lit a cigarette with apparent calmness, swaggering to the window; but his legs did not cease to tremble, and the unsteadiness of his gait caused Xantippe to smile as she watched him. Resting by the window, Gregorio widened the lips of the lattice and let in a stream of moonbeams that rested on wife and child, illumining the dark corner.

"Gregorio!"

"Yes."

"Have you told me all? Is there nothing else to tell em about our son and the Jew?"

Gregorio felt he must now speak; it was not possible to keep silence longer. He was pleased that his wife had begun the conversation, for it seemed easier to answer questions than to frame them. "I have told you the whole story. There is no more to tell. It was by accident I found him in the bazaar, and that devil Amos was bending over him. I could kill that man."

"What good would that do?"

"Fancy if we had lost the boy! Think of the sacrifices we have made for him, and they would have been useless."

"Have you made any sacrifices, Gregorio?"

The question was quietly asked, but there was a ring of irony in the sound of the voice, and Gregorio, to shun his wife's gaze, moved into the friendly shadows. For some minutes he did not answer. At length, with a nervous laugh, he replied:

"Of course. We have both made sacrifices, great sacrifices."

"It is odd," pursued Xantippe, gently, as if speaking to herself, "that you should so flatter yourself. You professed to care for me once; you only regard me now as a slave to earn money for you."

"It is for our son's sake."

"Is it for our son's sake also that you sit with Madam Marx, that you drink her wine, that you kiss her?"

Gregorio could not answer. He felt it were useless to try and explain, though the reason seemed to him clear enough.

"I am glad to have the chance," continued Xantippe, "of talking to you, for we may now understand each other. I have made the greatest sacrifice, and because it was for our son's sake I forgave you. I wept, but, as I wept, I said, 'It is hell for Gregorio too.' But when I looked from the window this afternoon I knew it was not hell for you. I knew you did not care what became of me. It was pleasant for you to send me away to make money while you drank and kissed at the Penny-farthing Shop. I came suddenly to know that the man had spoken truth."

"What man?" asked Gregorio, huskily.

"The man! The man you bade me find. Because money is not gathered from the pavements. You know that, and you sent me out to get money. When I first came back to you I flung the gold at you; it burned my fingers, and your eagerness for it stung. But I did not quite hate you, though his words had begun to chime in my ears: 'In my country such a husband would be horsewhipped.' When you were kind I was little more than a dog you liked to pet. I thought that was how all women were treated. I know differently now. You will earn money through me, for it is my duty to my son, but you have earned something else."

"Yes?" queried Gregorio.

"My hate. Surely you are not surprised? I have learned what love is these last few days, have learned what a real man is like. I know you to be what he called you, a cur and a coward. I should never have learned this but for you, and I am grateful, very grateful. It is useless to swear and to threaten me with your fists. You dare not strike me, because, were you to injure me, you would lose your money. You have tried to degrade me, and you have failed. I am happier than I have ever been, and far, far wiser. When a woman learns what a man's love is, she becomes wiser in a day than if she had studied books for a hundred years."

Xantippe ceased speaking and, taking her son in her arms, closed her eyes and fell asleep quietly, a gentle smile hovering round her lips.

Gregorio scowled at her savagely, and would have liked to strike her, to beat out his passion on her white breast and shoulders. But she had spoken only the truth when she said he dare not touch her. With impotent oaths he sought to let off the anger that boiled in him. He feared to think, and every word she had uttered made him think in spite of himself. The events of sixty hours had destroyed what little of good there was in the man. Save only the idolatrous love for his child, he scarcely retained one ennobling quality.

Little by little his anger cooled, his shame died out of him, and he began to wonder curiously what manner of man this was whose words had so stirred his wife. Wondering he fell asleep, nor did he awaken till the sun was risen.

While eating his breakfast he inquired cunningly concerning this wise teacher of the gospels of love and hate, but Xantippe for a time did not answer.

"Is he a Greek?"

"No."

"A Frenchman?"

"No."

"A German?"

"No."

Suddenly Gregorio felt a kind of cramp at his heart, and he had to pause before he put the next question. He could scarcely explain why he hesitated, but he called to mind the Paradise cafe and the red-faced Englishman. He was ready enough to sacrifice his wife if by so doing money might be gained, but he felt somehow hurt in his vanity at the idea of this ugly, slow-witted Northerner usurping his place. With an effort, however, he put the question:

"Is he an Englishman?"

"Yes."

He was seized with a tumult of anger. He spoke volubly, talking of the ignorance of the English, their brutality, their dull brains, their stupid pride. Xantippe waited till he had finished speaking and then replied quietly:

"It cannot matter to you. It is my concern. You have lost all rights to be angry with me or those connected with me."

Gregorio refused to hear reason, and explained how he begrudged them their wealth and fame. "For these English are a dull people, and we Greeks are greatly superior."

"I do not agree with you," Xantippe replied. "I have learned what a man is since I have known him, and I have learned to hate you. You may have more brains—that I know nothing of, nor do I care. He could not behave as you have behaved, nor have sacrificed me as you have sacrificed me. Some of his money comes to you. You want money. Be satisfied."

Gregorio felt the justice of her words, and he watched her put on her hat and leave the room. A minute later, looking out of the window, he saw her link her arm in that of the Englishman of the Paradiso, and across the street, at the threshold of the Penny-farthing Shop, Madam Marx waved her hand to himself and laughed.





VIII—A DESOLATE HOME-COMING

Toward the evening of a day a fortnight later, Gregorio found himself seated in Madam Marx's cafe, idly watching the passers-by. He was feeling happier, for that was being amassed which alone could insure happiness to him. Each day some golden pieces were added to the amount saved, and the cafe at Benhur seemed almost within his grasp. The feeling of security from want acted as a narcotic and soothed him, so that the things which should have troubled him scarcely interested him at all. He was intoxicated with the sight of gold. When he had first seen Xantippe and the Englishman together his anger had been violent; but when at last the futility of his rage became certain, his aggressive passion had softened to a smouldering discontent that hardly worried him, unless he heard some one speak a British name. His prosperity had destroyed the last vestiges of shame and soothed his illogical outbursts of fury. He was contented enough now to sit all day with Madam Marx, and returned to his home in the evening when Xantippe was away. He had spoken to her only once since she had told him she hated him. He had strolled out of the cafe about midday and entered his room. Xantippe was there, talking to her child, and quietly bade him go away.

"It's my room as well as yours," Gregorio had answered.

"It is my money that pays for it," was the reply.

A long conversation followed, but Xantippe met the man's coarse anger with quiet scorn, and told him that if he stayed she would grow to dislike her son since he was the father.

Gregorio was wise enough to control his anger then. For he knew that if she were really to lose her love for the boy, all his chances, and the boy's chances, of ease and prosperity would be destroyed. It was, of course, ridiculous to imagine she would supply him with money then. That she thoroughly loathed him, and would always loathe him, was very certain. So great, indeed, seemed her contempt for him that it was quite possible she might come to hate his child. So he did not attempt to remain in the room, but as he closed the door after him he waited a moment and listened. He heard her heave a sigh of relief and then say to the little fellow, "How like your father you grow! My God! I almost think I hate you for being so like him." Gregorio shuddered as he ran noiselessly downstairs. He never ventured to speak to her again. He argued himself out of the disquiet into which her words had thrown him. He knew it was difficult for a woman to hate her child. The birth-pains cement a love it requires a harsh wrench to sever. He easily persuaded himself, as he sipped Madam Marx's coffee, that if he kept in the background all cause for hatred would be removed. As for her feelings toward himself, he had ceased, almost, to care. The money was worth the cost paid in the attainment of it, and a woman's laugh was less sweet to him than the chink of gold and silver pieces. On the whole Gregorio had little reason to be troubled; only unreasoning dislike for the Englishman—why could not he be of any other nation, or, if an Englishman, any other Englishman?—hurt his peace of mind. And for the most part his discontent only smouldered.

Madam Marx brought her coffee and sat beside him. Her face betokened satisfaction, and she looked at Gregorio with a possessive smile. She had gained her desire, and asked fortune for no other gift.

"You have not seen Xantippe since she turned you out? Ah, well, it is much better you should keep away. You are welcome here, and it is foolish to go where one is not wanted."

"I've not seen her; I'm afraid to see her." He spoke openly to madam now.

"Some women are queer. If she had ever really loved you, she would not have thrown you over. I should not have complained had I been in her place. One cannot always choose one's lot."

"It's that damned Englishman who has spoiled her."

"Ah, yes, those English! I know them."

"Did I tell you what she said about the boy?"

"Yes, my friend. But as long as you don't worry her, her words need not worry you."

"They don't, except sometimes at night. I wake up and remember them, and then I am afraid."

"Why do you hate the Englishman? To my mind it is lucky for both of you that this Englishman saw her. There are not men so rich as the English, and he is a rich Englishman. You are lucky."

"I hate him."

"Because he has stolen your wife's love?" Madam Marx, as she put the question, laid her fat hand upon Gregorio's shoulder and laughed confidently. The movement irritated him, but he never tried to resist her now.

"No, not quite that. I'm used to it, and the money more than compensates me. But I hated the man when I first saw him in the Paradise. There was a fiddler-woman he talked to, and he could scarcely make himself understood. He had money, and he gave her champagne and flowers. And I was starving, and the woman was beautiful."

Madam tapped his cheek and smiled.

"The woman can't interest you now. Also you have money—his money."

"Still I hate him."

"You Greeks are like children. Your hatred is unreasonable; there is no cause for it."

"Unreasonable and not to be reasoned away."

"Well, why worry about him? He won't follow you to Benhur, I fancy."

"It doesn't worry me generally; but when you mention him my hate springs up again. I forget him when I am by myself."

"Forget him now."

And they drank coffee in silence.

Darkness came on, and the blue night mist. Gregorio was impatient to see his son. He gazed intently at the door of the opposite house, little heeding madam, who was busy with preparations for the evening's entertainment of her customers. Suddenly he saw a woman leave the house, hail a passing carriage, and drive rapidly down the street toward the Place Mehemet Ali. Gregorio, with a cry of pleasure, rose and left the cafe. Madam Marx followed him to the door and called a good-night to him. Gregorio stood irresolutely in the middle of the road. He had promised the boy a boat, and he blamed himself for having forgotten to buy it. Grumbling at his forgetfulness, he hurried along the street, determined to waste no time. On occasions he could relinquish his lazy, slouching gait, and he would hurry always to obey the commands of the king his son. A pleasant smile at the thought of the pleasure his present would cause softened the sinister mould of his lips, and he sang softly to himself as he moved quickly cityward.

Before he had gone many yards an oath broke in upon the music, and he darted swiftly under the shadow of a wall; for coming forward him was Amos the Jew. But the old man's sharp eyes detected the victim, and, following Gregorio into his hiding-place, Amos laid his hand upon the Greek.

"Why do you try to hide when we have so much to say to one another?"

Gregorio shook himself from the Jew's touch and professed ignorance of the necessity for speech.

"Come, come, my friend, the money you borrowed is still owing in part."

"But you will be paid. We are saving money; we cannot put by all we earn—we must live."

"I will be paid now; if I am not, you are to blame for the consequences."

And with a courtly salute the Jew passed on. Now Gregorio had not forgotten his debt, nor the Jew's threats, and he fully intended to pay what he owed. But of course it would take time, and the man was too impatient. He realised he had been foolish not to pay something on account; but it hurt him to part with gold. He determined, however, to send Amos something when he returned home. So good a watch had been kept, he never doubted the child's safety. But it would be awkward if Amos got him put in jail. So he reckoned up how much he could afford to pay, and, having bought the toy, returned eagerly home. He ran upstairs, singing a barcarole at the top of his voice, and rushed into the room, waving the model ship above his head. "See here," he cried, "is the ship! I have not forgotten it." But his shout fell to a whisper. The room was empty.

With a heartbroken sob the man fell swooning on the floor.





IX—A DISCOVERY AND A CONSPIRACY

For long he lay stretched out upon the floor in a state of half-consciousness. He could hear the mosquitos buzzing about his face, he could hear, too, the sounds of life rise up from the street below; but he was able to move neither arm nor leg, and his head seemed fastened to the floor by immovable leaden weights. That his son was lost was all he understood.

How long he lay there he scarcely knew, but it seemed to him weeks. At last he heard footsteps on the stairs. He endeavoured vainly to raise himself, and, though he strove to cry out, his tongue refused to frame the words. Lying there, living and yet lifeless, he saw the door open and Amos enter. The old man hesitated a moment, for the room was dark, while Gregorio, who had easily recognised his visitor, lay impotent on the floor. Before Amos could become used to the darkness the door again opened, and Madam Marx entered with a lamp in her hand. Amos turned to see who had followed him, and, in turning, his foot struck against Gregorio's body. Immediately, the woman crying softly, both visitors knelt beside the sick man. A fierce look blazed in Gregorio's eyes, but the strong words of abuse that hurried through his brain would not be said.

"He is very ill," said Amos; "he has had a stroke of some sort."

"Help me to carry him to my house," sobbed the woman, and she kissed the Greek's quivering lip and pallid brow. Then rising to her feet, she turned savagely on the Jew.

"It is your fault. It is you who have killed him."

"Nay, madam; I had called here for my money, and I had a right to do so. It has been owing for a long time."

"No; you have killed him."

"Indeed, I wished him well. I was willing to forgive the debt if he would let me take the child."

A horrid look of agony passed over Gregorio's face, but he remained silent and motionless. The watchers saw that he understood and that a tempest of wrath and pain surged within the lifeless body. They stooped down and carried him downstairs and across the road to the Penny-farthing Shop. The Jew's touch burned Gregorio like hot embers, but he could not shake himself free. When he was laid on a bed in a room above the bar, through the floor of which rose discordant sounds of revelry, Amos left them. Madam Marx flung herself on the bed beside him and wept.

Two days later Gregorio sat, at sunset, by Madam Marx's side, on the threshold of the cafe. He had recovered speech and use of limbs. With wrathful eloquence he had told his companion the history of the terrible night, and now sat weaving plots in his maddened brain.

Replying to his assertion that Amos was responsible, Madam Marx said:

"Don't be too impetuous, Gregorio. Search cunningly before you strike. Maybe your wife knows something."

"My wife! Not she; she is with her Englishman. Amos has stolen the boy, and you know it as well as I do. Didn't he tell you he wanted the child? I met him that night, and he told me if I did not pay I had only myself to blame for the trouble that would fall on me."

"Come, come, Gregorio, cheer up!" said the woman; for the Greek, with head resting on his hands, was sobbing violently.

"I tell you, all I cared for in life is taken from me. But I will have my revenge, that I tell you too."

For a while they sat silent, looking into the street. At last Gregorio spoke:

"My wife has not returned since that night, has she?"

"I have not seen her."

"Well, I must see her; she can leave the Englishman now."

Madam Marx laughed a little, but said nothing.

"There is Ahmed," cried Gregorio, as a blue-clad figure passed on the other side of the street. He beckoned to the Arab, who came across at his summons.

"You seem troubled," he said, as he looked into the Greek's face; and Gregorio retold the terrible story.

"You know nothing of all this?" he added, suspiciously, as his narrative ended.

"Nothing."

"My God! it is so awful I thought all the world knew of it. You often nursed and played with the boy?"

"Ay, and fed him. We Arabs love children, even Christian children, and I will help you if I can."

"Why should Amos want the boy?" asked Madam Marx, as she put coffee and tobacco before the guests.

"Because I owe him money, and he knew the loss of my son would be the deadliest revenge. He will make my son a Jew, a beastly Jew. By God, he shall not, he shall not!"

"We must find him and save him," said the woman.

"He will never be a Jew. That is not what Amos wants your son for; there are plenty of Jews." Ahmed spoke quietly.

"They sacrifice children," he continued, after a moment's pause; "surely you know that, and if you would save your boy there is not much time to lose."

Gregorio trembled at Ahmed's words. He wondered how he could have forgotten the common report, and his fingers grasped convulsively the handle of his knife.

"Let us go to Amos," he said, speaking the words with difficulty, for he was choking with fear for his son.

"Wait," answered the Arab; "I will come again to-night and bring some friends with me, two men who will be glad to serve you. We Arabs are not sorry to strike at the Jews; we have our own wrongs. Wait here till I come."

"But what will you do?" asked Madam Marx, looking anxiously on the man she loved, though her words were for the Arab.

"Gregorio will ask for his son. If the old man refuses to restore him, or denies that he has taken him, then we will know the worst, and then—"

Gregorio's knife-blade glittered in the sunset rays, as he tested its sharpness between thumb and finger. The Arab watched with a smile. "We understand one another," he said. There was no need to finish the description of his plan. With a solemn wave of his hand he left the cafe.

"That man Ahmed," said Madam Marx, "has a grudge against Amos. It dates from the bombardment, and he had waited all these years to avenge himself. I believe it was the loss of his wife."

"Amos made her a Jewess, eh?" And then, after a pause, Gregorio added:

"So we can depend on Ahmed. To-night I will win back my son or—"

"Or?" queried madam, tremblingly.

"Or Amos starts on his journey to hell. God, how my fingers itch to slay him! The devil, the Jew devil!"





X—AT THE HOUSE OF AMOS

As Ahmed had advised, Gregorio settled himself patiently to await the summons. Madam would have liked to ask him many questions, and to have extracted a promise from him not to risk his life in any mad enterprise his accomplice might suggest. But though the Greek's body seemed almost lifeless, so quietly and immovably he rested on his chair, there was a restless look in his eyes that told her how fiercely and irrepressibly his anger burned. She knew enough of his race to know that no power on earth could stop him striking for revenge. And she trembled, for she knew also that directly he had begun to strike his madness would increase, and that only sheer physical exhaustion would stay his hand.

Madam Marx was unhappy, and as she waited on her customers her eyes rested continually on the Greek, who heeded her not. Once she carried some wine to him, and he drank eagerly, spilling a few drops on the floor first. "It's like blood," he muttered, and smiled. Madam hastily covered his mouth with her trembling fingers.

Just before midnight Ahmed arrived with his two friends. Gregorio saw them at once, and, calling them to him, they spoke together in low voices for a few moments. There was little need for words, and soon, scarcely noticed by the drinkers and gamblers, they passed out into the street and walked slowly toward the Jew's house. Ahmed rapidly repeated the plan of action. When they reached the door they stood for a moment before they woke the Arab, and these words passed between them:

"For a wife."

"For a sister."

"For a son."

Gregorio then demanded admittance and led the way, followed by his three friends. He had visited the house of Amos before, on less bloody but less delightful business, and he did not hesitate, but strode on to where he knew the Jew would be. His companions stood behind the curtain, awaiting the signal.

Amos looked somewhat surprised at the Greek's entrance, but motioned him to a seat, and, as on the occasion of his first visit, clapped his hands together as a signal that coffee and pipes were required.

"It is kind of you to come, for doubtless you wish to pay me what is owing."

"I wish to pay you."

"That is well. I hope you are better again. I regretted to find you so ill two nights ago."

"I am better."

The conversation ceased, for Gregorio was restless and his fingers itched to do their work. Something in his manner alarmed Amos, for he summoned in two of his servants and raised himself slightly, as if the better to avoid an attack. But he continued to smoke calmly, watching the Greek under his half-closed lids.

"I have another piece of business to settle with you."

"Do you want to borrow more money because I refuse to lend you any?"

"No; it is you who have borrowed, and I have come to you to receive back my own."

"I fail to understand you."

Gregorio tried to keep calm, but it was not possible. Rising to his feet, he bent over the Jew and cried out:

"Give me back my son, you Jew dog!"

"Your son is not here."

"You lie! by God, you lie! If he is not here you have murdered him."

"Madman!" shouted Amos, as the Greek's knife flashed from its sheath; but before he or his servants could stay the uplifted arm the Jew sank back among his cushions, wounded to the heart. With a shout of triumph and a "Death of all Jews!" Gregorio turned savagely on the servants and, reinforced by his companions, soon succeeded in slaying them. Then leaving the dead side by side, the four men dashed through the house seeking fresh victims. Ten minutes later they were in the street again, dripping with the blood of women and men, for in their fury they had killed every human being in the house.

Down the narrow native streets they pushed on quickly, hugging the shadows, toward the Penny-farthing Shop. Madam Marx, her ears sharpened by fear, heard them, admitted them by a side door, and led them quickly to an upper room. Thither she carried water and clean garments, but dared not ask any questions. Sick with anxiety, she re-entered the bar and waited.

At length the murderers appeared and called for coffee, and Madam Marx attended to their wants. In a few minutes the Egyptians left, and Gregorio and she were alone. Coming near him, she placed her hand timidly on his shoulder, and asked him, in a hoarse whisper, to tell her what had happened.

"My son was not there."

"Well?"

"Well, you can guess the rest. Not one person remains alive of that devil's household."

Madam Marx gasped at the magnitude of the crime, and though her terrors increased, her pride in the man capable of so tremendous revenge increased also.

"What will happen to you?" she found voice to ask.

"Nothing. I must hide here. We were not seen. Besides, you remember the last time a Greek murdered a Jew—it was at Port Said—the matter was hushed up. Our consuls care as little for Jews as we do. My God, how glad I am I killed him!"

His eyes were fixed on the street as he spoke, and suddenly he started to his feet. Madam rose too, and clung to him. He pushed her roughly on one side, while an evil smile played on his lips.

"By God, she shall come back now!"

"Who?"

"Xantippe. There is no need for her to live with the Englishman now. Our son is dead and the Jew in hell. I will at least have my wife back."

"She will not come."

"She will come. By God, I will make her! I have tasted blood to-night, and I am not a child to be treated with contempt. I say I will make her come."

"But if she refuses?"

"Then I will take care she does not go back to the Englishman."

"You will—" but madam's voice faltered. Gregorio read her meaning and laughed a yes.

"But, Gregorio, think; you will be hanged for that. You wife is not a Jewess."

But Gregorio laughed again and strode into the street. He was mad with grief and the intoxicating draughts of vengeance he had swallowed. He strode across the road and mounted the stairs with steady feet. Madam Marx followed him, weeping and calling on him to come back. As he reached the door of his room she flung herself before him, but he pushed her on one side with his feet and shut the door behind him as he entered.

Lying on the threshold, she heard the bolt fastened, and knew the last act of the tragedy was begun.





XI—HUSBAND AND WIFE

As Gregorio entered the room, Xantippe, who was kneeling by a box into which she was placing clothes neatly folded, turned her head and said laughingly:

"You are impatient, my friend; I have nearly—"

But recognising Gregorio, she did not finish the sentence. She sat down on the edge of the box. Her face became white, and the blood left her lips. With a great effort she remained quiet and folded her hands on her lap.

Gregorio looked at her for a moment, a cruel smile making his sinister face appear almost terrible, and his bloodshot eyes glared at her savagely. At last he broke the silence by shouting her name hoarsely, making at the same time a movement toward her. He looked like a wild animal about to spring upon his prey. Xantippe, however, did not flinch, answering softly:

"I am not deaf. What do you want here?"

"It is my room; I suppose I have a right to be here."

"I apologise for having intruded."

"None of your smooth speeches. The Englishman has schooled you carefully, I see. Can you say 'good-bye' in English yet?"

"Why should I say 'good-bye'?"

"It is time. You will come back to me now."

"Never."

Gregorio laughed hysterically and stood beside her. His fingers played with her hair. In spite of her fear lest she should irritate him, Xantippe shrank from his touch. Gregorio noticed her aversion and said savagely:

"You must get used to me, Xantippe. From to-night we live together again. It is not necessary now for you to earn money."

"I shall not come back to you. I have told you I hate you. It is your own fault that I leave you."

"It will be my fault if you do leave me."

He pushed her on to the mattress and held her there.

"Let us talk," he said.

For a few minutes there was silence, and then he continued:

"Amos is dead, and our debts are paid."

"How did you pay them?"

"With this," and as he spoke he touched the handle of his knife. "Don't shudder; he deserved it, and I shall be safe in a few days. These affairs are quickly forgotten. Besides, there is another reason why we should not live as we have lately been living."

Xantippe opened her eyes as she asked, "What reason?"

Gregorio relaxed his hold, for the memory of his loss shook him with sobs. Cat-like, Xantippe had waited her opportunity and sprang away from his grasp. The movement brought the man to his senses. He rushed at her with an oath, waving the knife in his hand. Xantippe prepared to defend herself. They stood, desperate, before each other, neither daring to begin the struggle. Through the awful silence came the sound of sobs and a plaintive voice crying:

"Gregorio, come back, leave her; I love you."

"Is Madam Marx outside?" hissed Xantippe.

"Yes."

"Then go to her. I tell you I hate you." She pointed to the half-filled box—"I was going to leave here to-night. I will never return to you."

"You were going with the Englishman?"

"He is a man."

Gregorio paused a moment, then in a suppressed voice, half choking at the words, said:

"Our son—do you know what has happened to him? You shall not leave me."

"I know about our son. I am glad to think he is away from your evil influence. Let me pass." Xantippe moved toward the door, but Gregorio seized her by the throat.

"You are glad our son is killed; you helped Amos to kill him."

Rage and despair impelled him. Laughing brutally, he struck her on the breast, and, as he tottered, sent his knife deep into her heart. For a few seconds he stood over her exulting, and then opened the door. Madam Marx, white with fear, rushed into the room. Seeing the murdered woman, a look of triumph came into her eyes. But it was a momentary triumph, for she realised at once the gravity of the crime. She had little pity or sorrow to waste on the dead, but she was full of concern for the safety of the murderer.

"This is a bad night's work, Gregorio."

"Is it? She deserved death. I am glad I killed her. God, how peacefully I shall sleep tonight!"

"This is a worse matter than the other, my friend; you must get away from here at once."

"Let us leave the corpse; I am thirsty," Gregorio answered, callously. With a last look at Xantippe dead upon the floor, the two left the room and made fast the bolt before descending the stairs. As they emerged from the doorway into the street, some police rode by, and Gregorio trembled a little as he stood watching them.

"I want a drink; I am trembling," he said, huskily, and followed Madam Marx into the shop.

The sun was beginning to rise, and already signs of a new life were stirring. The day-workers appeared at the windows and in the streets.

"You must get away at night, Gregorio, and keep hidden all day."

"All right. Give me some wine. I can arrange better when my thirst is satisfied."

After drinking deeply he turned and laughed. "It has been a busy time since sunset."

Then, as if a new idea suddenly struck him, he queried cunningly, "There will be a reward offered?"

"I suppose so."

"Then you will be a rich woman."

Madam Marx flung herself at his feet and wept bitterly. The blow was a cruel one indeed. Eagerly she entreated him to retract his words. She reminded him of all she had done for him, of all she would still do. A sort of eloquence came to her as she pleaded her cause, and Gregorio, weary with excitement, kissed her as he asked:

"But why should you not give me up?"

"Because I love you."

Neither blood nor cruelty could stain him in her eyes.

At last her passion spent itself; calmed and soothed by Gregorio's caress she realised again the danger her lover ran. Vainly were plans discussed; no fair chance of escape seemed open. At last Gregorio said:

"I shall leave here to-night for Ramleh and live in the desert for a time. If you help me we can manage easily. When my beard is grown I can get back here safely enough, and the matter will be forgotten. You must collect food and take it by train to the last station, and get the box buried by Ahmed near the palace. I can creep toward it at night unseen."

"But I will come to you at night and bring food and drink."

"No. That would only attract attention. You must not leave your customers. But the drink is the worst part of the matter. I must have water. Get as many ostrich-eggs as you can, and fill them with water, and seal them. Hide these with the food, and I will carry some of them into the farther desert and bury them there."

"Gregorio, if all comes right you will not be sorry you killed her?"

"She hated me. I shall not be sorry."

And Madam Marx smiled and forgot her fears.





XII—IN THE DESERT AND ON THE SEA

By the last train leaving Alexandria for Ramleh, the next evening, Gregorio sought to escape his pursuers. He had heard from Ahmed on the platform, just before starting, that Xantippe's body had been discovered, and that already the police were on his track. He sat in a corner of a third-class carriage closely muffled, and eyeing his neighbours suspiciously. He sighed with relief as the train moved out of the station and began to pass by the sand-hills and white villas, showing ghost-like in the damp mist.

When he reached St. Antonio he saw the lights of the casino blazing cheerfully, and the pure clear desert air invigorated him. Fascinated by the glare, he strolled toward the casino and decided, in spite of the risk, to enter. He watched from a corner the players, and greedily coveted the masses of gold and silver piled in pyramids behind the croupiers. He heard the violins playing Suppe's overture, and the remembrance came vividly to him of the Paradiso and the fair girl with whom the Englishman talked. The exciting events following that evening passed before him—a lurid panorama.

An hour fled quickly away; then he sought the solitude of the desert, and, having collected into a bag as much food and as many eggs as he could carry, he walked away over the sands.

Under the stars he dug holes wherein to bury the eggs, and marked the spots with stones; then, wrapping himself in his cloak, lay down to sleep. All next day he loitered idly about, shunning the gaze of every wandering Arab. When evening came he drew near to the palace to seek for food. To his horror, the box had not been refilled. At first he hardly realised how awful was his plight. Then the truth dawned upon him. Ahmed and Madam Marx must have been arrested. He drew near to the casino and stood under the open windows listening. A cold shudder ran down his back, his face grew pale, and his lips trembled, for he heard two men discussing the murder and the capture of his friends. An involuntary smile lighted up the gloom of his features for a moment as one remarked that the chief offender, the woman's husband, had eluded pursuit. Then he crept back into the desert and waited for the dawn.

The sun rose, fiery and relentless, glittering on the waters of Aboukir, and the cloudless heaven blazed like a prairie on fire. At midday, when its rays fell straight upon him, his thirst became intense, and with feverish fingers he dug up an egg. It was empty. He tossed it away and dragged himself to another hole. The second egg was empty. In turn he dug up all his eggs, and all alike were empty. Improperly sealed, scantily covered by the sand, the water had evaporated. A great despair seized him; he called on God in his anguish, and the silence of the desert terrified him. In a fit of desolate anger he pulled off his cap, and summoned all the saints, Christ, and God Himself, to enter it, and then trampled on it, laughing wildly. Then he flung himself upon the sand, his head still left bare to the pitiless sun. He knew the end had come, but there was not any regret in his heart for his crimes, only an impotent dismay and anger at his solitary condition. The thirst increased every minute, and he gripped the sand with his fingers in his agony. His last word was an oath.

At sunset he was dead.

Two days later Madam Marx left Alexandria by train for Ramleh. There was no evidence against her, and she had soon been released. Her own trouble scarcely disconcerted her; she had feared only for the Greek in the desert. The thought of his agony, his hunger, goaded her nearly to madness; but she was a little comforted when she remembered the eggs. There was enough water in them to last him two or three days. It was the hour of sunset when she arrived, and she instantly set out desertward, carrying a basket containing wine and food. She had determined to live at the hotel until the days of persecution were past. The heavy sand made it hard to proceed rapidly, but she struggled on bravely, and when far enough from civilisation called aloud the signal-word agreed on. But no one answered. All through the night she wandered, searching, till within an hour of sunrise; then she gave way and sat weeping on the sand. With daylight she rose to her feet, determined to find her lover, but had scarcely gone twenty yards before, with a low cry of grief, she knelt beside the body of a dead man. In the half-eaten, decayed features she recognised Gregorio and knew she had come too late. Undeterred by the hideous spectacle, she kissed him tenderly and lay beside him.

The sun mounted slowly in the heavens.

The living figure lay as lifeless as the dead. But after a while the woman rose and dug with her hands a hollow in the sand. She heeded not the heat, nor the flight of time, and by evening her work was done.

Raising the body in her arms, she carried it to the hollow and laid it gently down, then tearfully shovelled back the sand till it was hidden. So Gregorio found a tomb. Nor did it remain unconsecrated, for beside it Madam Marx knelt and spoke with faltering lips the remnants of the prayers she had learned when a child. As she prayed she watched vaguely a steamer disappear behind the horizon.

The khedival mail-boat Ramses sped swiftly over the unruffled surface of the sea. At the stern a tall fair Englishman sat looking on the level shores of Egypt and the minarets of Alexandria. With a sad smile he turned to the child who called to him by his name. They were a strange pair, for the boy was dark, and foreign-looking, and there was something of cunning in his restless black eyes. The man's large hand rested softly on the raven curls of the youngster as he muttered to himself:

"For her sake I will watch over you, and you shall grow up to be a true man."

So Xantippe's life had not been lived in vain, for she had loved and been loved, and her memory was sweet to her lover. Moreover, Gregorio's dreams of wealth for his son were to find fulfilment, and the sand of the desert, maybe, lies lightly on him.

For Whom the Bell Tolls
By
Ernest Hemingway
Courtesy:
Shahid Riaz
Islamabad - Pakistan
shahid.riaz@gmail.com“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway
2
No man is an Iland, intire of it selfe; every man is a peece of the Continent, a part of
the maine; if a Clod bee washed away by the Sea, Europe is the lesse, as well as if a
Promontorie were, as well as if a Mannor of thy friends or of thine owne were; any mans
death diminishes me, because I am involved in Mankinde; And therefore never send to
know for whom the bell tolls; It tolls for thee.
—John Donne
1
He lay flat on the brown, pine-needled floor of the forest, his chin on his folded arms,
and high overhead the wind blew in the tops of the pine trees. The mountainside sloped
gently where he lay; but below it was steep and he could see the dark of the oiled road
winding through the pass. There was a stream alongside the road and far down the
pass he saw a mill beside the stream and the falling water of the dam, white in the
summer sunlight.
“Is that the mill?” he asked.
“Yes.”
“I do not remember it.”
“It was built since you were here. The old mill is farther down; much below the pass.”
He spread the photostated military map out on the forest floor and looked at it
carefully. The old man looked over his shoulder. He was a short and solid old man in a
black peasant’s smock and gray iron-stiff trousers and he wore rope-soled shoes. He
was breathing heavily from the climb and his hand rested on one of the two heavy packs
they had been carrying.
“Then you cannot see the bridge from here.”
“No,” the old man said. “This is the easy country of the pass where the stream flows
gently. Below, where the road turns out of sight in the trees, it drops suddenly and there
is a steep gorge—”
“I remember.”
“Across this gorge is the bridge.”
“And where are their posts?”
“There is a post at the mill that you see there.”
The young man, who was studying the country, took his glasses from the pocket of his
faded, khaki flannel shirt, wiped the lenses with a handkerchief, screwed the eyepieces
around until the boards of the mill showed suddenly clearly and he saw the wooden
bench beside the door; the huge pile of sawdust that rose behind the open shed where
the circular saw was, and a stretch of the flume that brought the logs down from the
mountainside on the other bank of the stream. The stream showed clear and smooth-
looking in the glasses and, below the curl of the falling water, the spray from the dam
was blowing in the wind.
“There is no sentry.”
“There is smoke coming from the millhouse,” the old man said. “There are also clothes
hanging on a line.”
“I see them but I do not see any sentry.”
“Perhaps he is in the shade,” the old man explained. “It is hot there now. He would be
in the shadow at the end we do not see.”
“Probably. Where is the next post?”
“Below the bridge. It is at the roadmender’s hut at kilometer five from the top of the
pass.”
“How many men are here?” He pointed at the mill.
“Perhaps four and a corporal.”
“And below?”
“More. I will find out.”
“And at the bridge?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway
3
“Always two. One at each end.”
“We will need a certain number of men,” he said. “How many men can you get?”
“I can bring as many men as you wish,” the old man said. “There are many men now
here in the hills.”
“How many?”
“There are more than a hundred. But they are in small bands. How many men will you
need?”
“I will let you know when we have studied the bridge.”
“Do you wish to study it now?”
“No. Now I wish to go to where we will hide this explosive until it is time. I would like to
have it hidden in utmost security at a distance no greater than half an hour from the
bridge, if that is possible.”
“That is simple,” the old man said. “From where we are going, it will all be downhill to
the bridge. But now we must climb a little in seriousness to get there. Are you hungry?”
“Yes,” the young man said. “But we will eat later. How are you called? I have
forgotten.” It was a bad sign to him that he had forgotten.
“Anselmo,” the old man said. “I am called Anselmo and I come from Barco de Avila.
Let me help you with that pack.”
The young man, who was tall and thin, with sun-streaked fair hair, and a wind- and
sun-burned face, who wore the sun-faded flannel shirt, a pair of peasant’s trousers and
rope-soled shoes, leaned over, put his arm through one of the leather pack straps and
swung the heavy pack up onto his shoulders. He worked his arm through the other strap
and settled the weight of the pack against his back. His shirt was still wet from where the
pack had rested.
“I have it up now,” he said. “How do we go?”
“We climb,” Anselmo said.
Bending under the weight of the packs, sweating, they climbed steadily in the pine
forest that covered the mountainside. There was no trail that the young man could see,
but they were working up and around the face of the mountain and now they crossed a
small stream and the old man went steadily on ahead up the edge of the rocky stream
bed. The climbing now was steeper and more difficult, until finally the stream seemed to
drop down over the edge of a smooth granite ledge that rose above them and the old
man waited at the foot of the ledge for the young man to come up to him.
“How are you making it?”
“All right,” the young man said. He was sweating heavily and his thigh muscles were
twitchy from the steepness of the climb.
“Wait here now for me. I go ahead to warn them. You do not want to be shot at
carrying that stuff.”
“Not even in a joke,” the young man said. “Is it far?”
“It is very close. How do they call thee?”
“Roberto,” the young man answered. He had slipped the pack off and lowered it gently
down between two boulders by the stream bed.
“Wait here, then, Roberto, and I will return for you.”
“Good,” the young man said. “But do you plan to go down this way to the bridge?”
“No. When we go to the bridge it will be by another way. Shorter and easier.”
“I do not want this material to be stored too far from the bridge.”
“You will see. If you are not satisfied, we will take another place.”
“We will see,” the young man said.
He sat by the packs and watched the old man climb the ledge. It was not hard to climb
and from the way he found hand-holds without searching for them the young man could
see that he had climbed it many times before. Yet whoever was above had been very
careful not to leave any trail.
The young man, whose name was Robert Jordan, was extremely hungry and he was
worried. He was often hungry but he was not usually worried because he did not give
any importance to what happened to himself and he knew from experience how simple it“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway
4
was to move behind the enemy lines in all this country. It was as simple to move behind
them as it was to cross through them, if you had a good guide. It was only giving
importance to what happened to you if you were caught that made it difficult; that and
deciding whom to trust. You had to trust the people you worked with completely or not at
all, and you had to make decisions about the trusting. He was not worried about any of
that. But there were other things.
This Anselmo had been a good guide and he could travel wonderfully in the
mountains. Robert Jordan could walk well enough himself and he knew from following
him since before daylight that the old man could walk him to death. Robert Jordan
trusted the man, Anselmo, so far, in everything except judgment. He had not yet had an
opportunity to test his judgment, and, anyway, the judgment was his own responsibility.
No, he did not worry about Anselmo and the problem of the bridge was no more difficult
than many other problems. He knew how to blow any sort of bridge that you could name
and he had blown them of all sizes and constructions. There was enough explosive and
all equipment in the two packs to blow this bridge properly even if it were twice as big as
Anselmo reported it, as he remembered it when he had walked over it on his way to La
Granja on a walking trip in 1933, and as Golz had read him the description of it night
before last in that upstairs room in the house outside of the Escorial.
“To blow the bridge is nothing,” Golz had said, the lamplight on his scarred, shaved
head, pointing with a pencil on the big map. “You understand?”
“Yes, I understand.”
“Absolutely nothing. Merely to blow the bridge is a failure.”
“Yes, Comrade General.”
“To blow the bridge at a stated hour based on the time set for the attack is how it
should be done. You see that naturally. That is your right and how it should be done.”
Golz looked at the pencil, then tapped his teeth with it.
Robert Jordan had said nothing.
“You understand that is your right and how it should be done,” Golz went on, looking
at him and nodding his head. He tapped on the map now with the pencil. “That is how I
should do it. That is what we cannot have.”
“Why, Comrade General?”
“Why?” Golz said, angrily. “How many attacks have you seen and you ask me why?
What is to guarantee that my orders are not changed? What is to guarantee that the
attack is not annulled? What is to guarantee that the attack is not postponed? What is to
guarantee that it starts within six hours of when it should start? Has any attack ever
been as it should?”
“It will start on time if it is your attack,” Robert Jordan said.
“They are never my attacks,” Golz said. “I make them. But they are not mine. The
artillery is not mine. I must put in for it. I have never been given what I ask for even
when they have it to give. That is the least of it. There are other things. You know how
those people are. It is not necessary to go into all of it. Always there is something.
Always some one will interfere. So now be sure you understand.”
“So when is the bridge to be blown?” Robert Jordan had asked.
“After the attack starts. As soon as the attack has started and not before. So that no
reinforcements will come up over that road.” He pointed with his pencil. “I must know
that nothing will come up over that road.”
“And when is the attack?”
“I will tell you. But you are to use the date and hour only as an indication of a
probability. You must be ready for that time. You will blow the bridge after the attack has
started. You see?” he indicated with the pencil. “That is the only road on which they can
bring up reinforcements. That is the only road on which they can get up tanks, or
artillery, or even move a truck toward the pass which I attack. I must know that bridge is
gone. Not before, so it can be repaired if the attack is postponed. No. It must go when
the attack starts and I must know it is gone. There are only two sentries. The man who
will go with you has just come from there. He is a very reliable man, they say. You will“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway
5
see. He has people in the mountains. Get as many men as you need. Use as few as
possible, but use enough. I do not have to tell you these things.”
“And how do I determine that the attack has started?”
“It is to be made with a full division. There will be an aerial bombardment as
preparation. You are not deaf, are you?”
“Then I may take it that when the planes unload, the attack has started?”
“You could not always take it like that,” Golz said and shook his head. “But in this
case, you may. It is my attack.”
“I understand it,” Robert Jordan had said. “I do not say I like it very much.”
“Neither do I like it very much. If you do not want to undertake it, say so now. If you
think you cannot do it, say so now.”
“I will do it,” Robert Jordan had said. “I will do it all right.”
“That is all I have to know,” Golz said. “That nothing comes up over that bridge. That is
absolute.”
“I understand.”
“I do not like to ask people to do such things and in such a way,” Golz went on. “I
could not order you to do it. I understand what you may be forced to do through my
putting such conditions. I explain very carefully so that you understand and that you
understand all of the possible difficulties and the importance.”
“And how will you advance on La Granja if that bridge is blown?”
“We go forward prepared to repair it after we have stormed the pass. It is a very
complicated and beautiful operation. As complicated and as beautiful as always. The
plan has been manufactured in Madrid. It is another of Vicente Rojo, the unsuccessful
professor’s, masterpieces. I make the attack and I make it, as always, not in sufficient
force. It is a very possible operation, in spite of that. I am much happier about it than
usual. It can be successful with that bridge eliminated. We can take Segovia. Look, I
show you how it goes. You see? It is not the top of the pass where we attack. We hold
that. It is much beyond. Look— Here— Like this—”
“I would rather not know,” Robert Jordan said.
“Good,” said Golz. “It is less of baggage to carry with you on the other side, yes?”
“I would always rather not know. Then, no matter what can happen, it was not me that
talked.”
“It is better not to know,” Golz stroked his forehead with the pencil. “Many times I wish
I did not know myself. But you do know the one thing you must know about the bridge?”
“Yes. I know that.”
“I believe you do,” Golz said. “I will not make you any little speech. Let us now have a
drink. So much talking makes me very thirsty, Comrade Hordan. You have a funny
name in Spanish, Comrade Hordown.”
“How do you say Golz in Spanish, Comrade General?”
“Hotze,” said Golz grinning, making the sound deep in his throat as though hawking
with a bad cold. “Hotze,” he croaked. “Comrade Heneral Khotze. If I had known how
they pronounced Golz in Spanish I would pick me out a better name before I come to
war here. When I think I come to command a division and I can pick out any name I
want and I pick out Hotze. Heneral Hotze. Now it is too late to change. How do you like
partizan work?” It was the Russian term for guerilla work behind the lines.
“Very much,” Robert Jordan said. He grinned. “It is very healthy in the open air.”
“I like it very much when I was your age, too,” Golz said. “They tell me you blow
bridges very well. Very scientific. It is only hearsay. I have never seen you do anything
myself. Maybe nothing ever happens really. You really blow them?” he was teasing now.
“Drink this,” he handed the glass of Spanish brandy to Robert Jordan. “You really blow
them?”
“Sometimes.”
“You better not have any sometimes on this bridge. No, let us not talk any more about
this bridge. You understand enough now about that bridge. We are very serious so we
can make very strong jokes. Look, do you have many girls on the other side of the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway
6
lines?”
“No, there is no time for girls.”
“I do not agree. The more irregular the service, the more irregular the life. You have
very irregular service. Also you need a haircut.”
“I have my hair cut as it needs it,” Robert Jordan said. He would be damned if he
would have his head shaved like Golz. “I have enough to think about without girls,” he
said sullenly.
“What sort of uniform am I supposed to wear?” Robert Jordan asked.
“None,” Golz said. “Your haircut is all right. I tease you. You are very different from
me,” Golz had said and filled up the glasses again.
“You never think about only girls. I never think at all. Why should I? I am Général
Sovietique. I never think. Do not try to trap me into thinking.”
Some one on his staff, sitting on a chair working over a map on a drawing board,
growled at him in the language Robert Jordan did not understand.
“Shut up,” Golz had said, in English. “I joke if I want. I am so serious is why I can joke.
Now drink this and then go. You understand, huh?”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan had said. “I understand.”
They had shaken hands and he had saluted and gone out to the staff car where the
old man was waiting asleep and in that car they had ridden over the road past
Guadarrama, the old man still asleep, and up the Navacerrada road to the Alpine Club
hut where he, Robert Jordan, slept for three hours before they started.
That was the last he had seen of Golz with his strange white face that never tanned,
his hawk eyes, the big nose and thin lips and the shaven head crossed with wrinkles
and with scars. Tomorrow night they would be outside the Escorial in the dark along the
road; the long lines of trucks loading the infantry in the darkness; the men, heavy
loaded, climbing up into the trucks; the machine-gun sections lifting their guns into the
trucks; the tanks being run up on the skids onto the long-bodied tank trucks; pulling the
Division out to move them in the night for the attack on the pass. He would not think
about that. That was not his business. That was Golz’s business. He had only one thing
to do and that was what he should think about and he must think it out clearly and take
everything as it came along, and not worry. To worry was as bad as to be afraid. It
simply made things more difficult.
He sat now by the stream watching the clear water flowing between the rocks and,
across the stream, he noticed there was a thick bed of watercress. He crossed the
stream, picked a double handful, washed the muddy roots clean in the current and then
sat down again beside his pack and ate the clean, cool green leaves and the crisp,
peppery-tasting stalks. He knelt by the stream and, pushing his automatic pistol around
on his belt to the small of his back so that it would not be wet, he lowered himself with a
hand on each of two boulders and drank from the stream. The water was achingly cold.
Pushing himself up on his hands he turned his head and saw the old man coming
down the ledge. With him was another man, also in a black peasant’s smock and the
dark gray trousers that were almost a uniform in that province, wearing rope-soled
shoes and with a carbine slung over his back. This man was bareheaded. The two of
them came scrambling down the rock like goats.
They came up to him and Robert Jordan got to his feet.
“Salud, Camarada,” he said to the man with the carbine and smiled.
“Salud,” the other said, grudgingly. Robert Jordan looked at the man’s heavy, beard-
stubbled face. It was almost round and his head was round and set close on his
shoulders. His eyes were small and set too wide apart and his ears were small and set
close to his head. He was a heavy man about five feet ten inches tall and his hands and
feet were large. His nose had been broken and his mouth was cut at one corner and the
line of the scar across the upper lip and lower jaw showed through the growth of beard
over his face.
The old man nodded his head at this man and smiled.
“He is the boss here,” he grinned, then flexed his arms as though to make the muscles“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway
7
stand out and looked at the man with the carbine in a half-mocking admiration. “A very
strong man.”
“I can see it,” Robert Jordan said and smiled again. He did not like the look of this man
and inside himself he was not smiling at all.
“What have you to justify your identity?” asked the man with the carbine.
Robert Jordan unpinned a safety pin that ran through his pocket flap and took a folded
paper out of the left breast pocket of his flannel shirt and handed it to the man, who
opened it, looked at it doubtfully and turned it in his hands.
So he cannot read, Robert Jordan noted.
“Look at the seal,” he said.
The old man pointed to the seal and the man with the carbine studied it, turning it in
his fingers.
“What seal is that?”
“Have you never seen it?”
“No.”
“There are two,” said Robert Jordan. “One is S. I. M., the service of the military
intelligence. The other is the General Staff.”
“Yes, I have seen that seal before. But here no one commands but me,” the other said
sullenly. “What have you in the packs?”
“Dynamite,” the old man said proudly. “Last night we crossed the lines in the dark and
all day we have carried this dynamite over the mountain.”
“I can use dynamite,” said the man with the carbine. He handed back the paper to
Robert Jordan and looked him over. “Yes. I have use for dynamite. How much have you
brought me?”
“I have brought you no dynamite,” Robert Jordan said to him evenly. “The dynamite is
for another purpose. What is your name?”
“What is that to you?”
“He is Pablo,” said the old man. The man with the carbine looked at them both
sullenly.
“Good. I have heard much good of you,” said Robert Jordan.
“What have you heard of me?” asked Pablo.
“I have heard that you are an excellent guerilla leader, that you are loyal to the
republic and prove your loyalty through your acts, and that you are a man both serious
and valiant. I bring you greetings from the General Staff.”
“Where did you hear all this?” asked Pablo. Robert Jordan registered that he was not
taking any of the flattery.
“I heard it from Buitrago to the Escorial,” he said, naming all the stretch of country on
the other side of the lines.
“I know no one in Buitrago nor in Escorial,” Pablo told him.
“There are many people on the other side of the mountains who were not there before.
Where are you from?”
“Avila. What are you going to do with the dynamite?”
“Blow up a bridge.”
“What bridge?”
“That is my business.”
“If it is in this territory, it is my business. You cannot blow bridges close to where you
live. You must live in one place and operate in another. I know my business. One who is
alive, now, after a year, knows his business.”
“This is my business,” Robert Jordan said. “We can discuss it together. Do you wish to
help us with the sacks?”
“No,” said Pablo and shook his head.
The old man turned toward him suddenly and spoke rapidly and furiously in a dialect
that Robert Jordan could just follow. It was like reading Quevedo. Anselmo was
speaking old Castilian and it went something like this, “Art thou a brute? Yes. Art thou a
beast? Yes, many times Hast thou a brain? Nay. None. Now we come for something of“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway
8
consummate importance and thee, with thy dwelling place to be undisturbed, puts thy
fox-hole before the interests of humanity. Before the interests of thy people. I this and
that in the this and that of thy father. I this and that and that in thy this. Pick up that bag.”
Pablo looked down.
“Every one has to do what he can do according to how it can be truly done,” he said. “I
live here and I operate beyond Segovia. If you make a disturbance here, we will be
hunted out of these mountains. It is only by doing nothing here that we are able to live in
these mountains. It is the principle of the fox.”
“Yes,” said Anselmo bitterly. “It is the principle of the fox when we need the wolf.”
“I am more wolf than thee,” Pablo said and Robert Jordan knew that he would pick up
the sack.
“Hi. Ho. . . ,” Anselmo looked at him. “Thou art more wolf than me and I am sixty-eight
years old.”
He spat on the ground and shook his head.
“You have that many years?” Robert Jordan asked, seeing that now, for the moment,
it would be all right and trying to make it go easier.
“Sixty-eight in the month of July.”
“If we should ever see that month,” said Pablo. “Let me help you with the pack,” he
said to Robert Jordan. “Leave the other to the old man.” He spoke, not sullenly, but
almost sadly now. “He is an old man of great strength.”
“I will carry the pack,” Robert Jordan said.
“Nay,” said the old man. “Leave it to this other strong man.”
“I will take it,” Pablo told him, and in his sullenness there was a sadness that was
disturbing to Robert Jordan. He knew that sadness and to see it here worried him.
“Give me the carbine then,” he said and when Pablo handed it to him, he slung it over
his back and, with the two men climbing ahead of him, they went heavily, pulling and
climbing up the granite shelf and over its upper edge to where there was a green
clearing in the forest.
They skirted the edge of the little meadow and Robert Jordan, striding easily now
without the pack, the carbine pleasantly rigid over his shoulder after the heavy, sweating
pack weight, noticed that the grass was cropped down in several places and signs that
picket pins had been driven into the earth. He could see a trail through the grass where
horses had been led to the stream to drink and there was the fresh manure of several
horses. They picket them here to feed at night and keep them out of sight in the timber
in the daytime, he thought. I wonder how many horses this Pablo has?
He remembered now noticing, without realizing it, that Pablo’s trousers were worn
soapy shiny in the knees and thighs. I wonder if he has a pair of boots or if he rides in
those alpargatas, he thought. He must have quite an outfit. But I don’t like that sadness,
he thought. That sadness is bad. That’s the sadness they get before they quit or before
they betray. That is the sadness that comes before the sell-out.
Ahead of them a horse whinnied in the timber and then, through the brown trunks of
the pine trees, only a little sunlight coming down through their thick, almost-touching
tops, he saw the corral made by roping around the tree trunks. The horses had their
heads pointed toward the men as they approached, and at the foot of a tree, outside the
corral, the saddles were piled together and covered with a tarpaulin.
As they came up, the two men with the packs stopped, and Robert Jordan knew it was
for him to admire the horses.
“Yes,” he said. “They are beautiful.” He turned to Pablo. “You have your cavalry and
all.”
There were five horses in the rope corral, three bays, a sorrel, and a buckskin. Sorting
them out carefully with his eyes after he had seen them first together, Robert Jordan
looked them over individually. Pablo and Anselmo knew how good they were and while
Pablo stood now proud and less sad-looking, watching them lovingly, the old man acted
as though they were some great surprise that he had produced, suddenly, himself.
“How do they look to you?” he asked.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway
9
“All these I have taken,” Pablo said and Robert Jordan was pleased to hear him speak
proudly.
“That,” said Robert Jordan, pointing to one of the bays, a big stallion with a white blaze
on his forehead and a single white foot, the near front, “is much horse.”
He was a beautiful horse that looked as though he had come out of a painting by
Velasquez.
“They are all good,” said Pablo. “You know horses?”
“Yes.”
“Less bad,” said Pablo. “Do you see a defect in one of these?”
Robert Jordan knew that now his papers were being examined by the man who could
not read.
The horses all still had their heads up looking at the man. Robert Jordan slipped
through between the double rope of the corral and slapped the buckskin on the haunch.
He leaned back against the ropes of the enclosure and watched the horses circle the
corral, stood watching them a minute more, as they stood still, then leaned down and
came out through the ropes.
“The sorrel is lame in the off hind foot,” he said to Pablo, not looking at him. “The hoof
is split and although it might not get worse soon if shod properly, she could break down
if she travels over much hard ground.”
“The hoof was like that when we took her,” Pablo said.
“The best horse that you have, the white-faced bay stallion, has a swelling on the
upper part of the cannon bone that I do not like.”
“It is nothing,” said Pablo. “He knocked it three days ago. If it were to be anything it
would have become so already.”
He pulled back the tarpaulin and showed the saddles. There were two ordinary
vaquero’s or herdsman’s saddles, like American stock saddles, one very ornate
vaquero’s saddle, with hand-tooled leather and heavy, hooded stirrups, and two military
saddles in black leather.
“We killed a pair of guardia civil,” he said, explaining the military saddles.
“That is big game.”
“They had dismounted on the road between Segovia and Santa Maria del Real. They
had dismounted to ask papers of the driver of a cart. We were able to kill them without
injuring the horses.”
“Have you killed many civil guards?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Several,” Pablo said. “But only these two without injury to the horses.”
“It was Pablo who blew up the train at Arevalo,” Anselmo said. “That was Pablo.”
“There was a foreigner with us who made the explosion,” Pablo said. “Do you know
him?”
“What is he called?”
“I do not remember. It was a very rare name.”
“What did he look like?”
“He was fair, as you are, but not as tall and with large hands and a broken nose.”
“Kashkin,” Robert Jordan said. “That would be Kashkin.”
“Yes,” said Pablo. “It was a very rare name. Something like that. What has become of
him?”
“He is dead since April.”
“That is what happens to everybody,” Pablo said, gloomily. “That is the way we will all
finish.”
“That is the way all men end,” Anselmo said. “That is the way men have always
ended. What is the matter with you, man? What hast thou in the stomach?”
“They are very strong,” Pablo said. It was as though he were talking to himself. He
looked at the horses gloomily. “You do not realize how strong they are. I see them
always stronget always better armed. Always with more material. Here am I with horses
like these. And what can I look forward to? To be hunted and to die. Nothing more.”
“You hunt as much as you are hunted,” Anselmo said.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 10
“No,” said Pablo. “Not any more. And if we leave these mountains now, where can we
go? Answer me that? Where now?”
“In Spain there are many mountains. There are the Sierra de Gredos if one leaves
here.”
“Not for me,” Pablo said. “I am tired of being hunted. Here we are all right. Now if you
blow a bridge here, we will be hunted. If they know we are here and hunt for us with
planes, they will find us. If they send Moors to hunt us out, they will find us and we must
go. I am tired of all this. You hear?” He turned to Robert Jordan. “What right have you, a
foreigner, to come to me and tell me what I must do?”
“I have not told you anything you must do,” Robert Jordan said to him.
“You will though,” Pablo said. “There. There is the badness.”
He pointed at the two heavy packs that they had lowered to the ground while they had
watched the horses. Seeing the horses had seemed to bring this all to a head in him
and seeing that Robert Jordan knew horses had seemed to loosen his tongue. The
three of them stood now by the rope corral and the patchy sunlight shone on the coat of
the bay stallion. Pablo looked at him and then pushed with his foot against the heavy
pack. “There is the badness.”
“I come only for my duty,” Robert Jordan told him. “I come under orders from those
who are conducting the war. If I ask you to help me, you can refuse and I will find others
who will help me. I have not even asked you for help yet. I have to do what I am ordered
to do and I can promise you of its importance. That I am a foreigner is not my fault. I
would rather have been born here.”
“To me, now, the most important is that we be not disturbed here,” Pablo said. “To me,
now, my duty is to those who are with me and to myself.”
“Thyself. Yes,” Anselmo said. “Thyself now since a long time. Thyself and thy horses.
Until thou hadst horses thou wert with us. Now thou art another capitalist more.”
“That is unjust,” said Pablo. “I expose the horses all the time for the cause.”
“Very little,” said Anselmo scornfully. “Very little in my judgment. To steal, yes. To eat
well, yes. To murder, yes. To fight, no.”
“You are an old man who will make himself trouble with his mouth.”
“I am an old man who is afraid of no one,” Anselmo told him. “Also I am an old man
without horses.”
“You are an old man who may not live long.”
“I am an old man who will live until I die,” Anselmo said. “And I am not afraid of foxes.”
Pablo said nothing but picked up the pack.
“Nor of wolves either,” Anselmo said, picking up the other pack. “If thou art a wolf.”
“Shut thy mouth,” Pablo said to him. “Thou art an old man who always talks too much.”
“And would do whatever he said he would do,” Anselmo said, bent under the pack.
“And who now is hungry. And thirsty. Go on, guerilla leader with the sad face. Lead us to
something to eat.”
It is starting badly enough, Robert Jordan thought. But Anselmo’s a man. They are
wonderful when they are good, he thought. There is no people like them when they are
good and when they go bad there is no people that is worse. Anselmo must have known
what he was doing when he brought us here. But I don’t like it. I don’t like any of it.
The only good sign was that Pablo was carrying the pack and that he had given him
the carbine. Perhaps he is always like that, Robert Jordan thought. Maybe he is just one
of the gloomy ones.
No, he said to himself, don’t fool yourself. You do not know how he was before; but
you do know that he is going bad fast and without hiding it. When he starts to hide it he
will have made a decision. Remember that, he told himself. The first friendly thing he
does, he will have made a decision. They are awfully good horses, though, he thought,
beautiful horses. I wonder what could make me feel the way those horses make Pablo
feel. The old man was right. The horses made him rich and as soon as he was rich he
wanted to enjoy life. Pretty soon he’ll feel bad because he can’t join the Jockey Club, I
guess, he thought. Pauvre Pablo. Il a manqué son Jockey.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 11
That idea made him feel better. He grinned, looking at the two bent backs and the big
packs ahead of him moving through the trees. He had not made any jokes with himself
all day and now that he had made one he felt much better. You’re getting to be as all the
rest of them, he told himself. You’re getting gloomy, too. He’d certainly been solemn and
gloomy with Golz. The job had overwhelmed him a little. Slightly overwhelmed, he
thought. Plenty overwhelmed. Golz was gay and he had wanted him to be gay too
before he left, but he hadn’t been.
All the best ones, when you thought it over, were gay. It was much better to be gay
and it was a sign of something too. It was like having immortality while you were still
alive. That was a complicated one. There were not many of them left though. No, there
were not many of the gay ones left. There were very damned few of them left. And if you
keep on thinking like that, my boy, you won’t be left either. Turn off the thinking now, old
timer, old comrade. You’re a bridge-blower now. Not a thinker. Man, I’m hungry, he
thought. I hope Pablo eats well.
2
They had come through the heavy timber to the cup-shaped upper end of the little
valley and he saw where the camp must be under the rim-rock that rose ahead of them
through the trees.
That was the camp all right and it was a good camp. You did not see it at all until you
were up to it and Robert Jordan knew it could not be spotted from the air. Nothing would
show from above. It was as well hidden as a bear’s den. But it seemed to be little better
guarded. He looked at it carefully as they came up.
There was a large cave in the rim-rock formation and beside the opening a man sat
with his back against the rock, his legs stretched out on the ground and his carbine
leaning against the rock. He was cutting away on a stick with a knife and he stared at
them as they came up, then went on whittling.
“Hola,” said the seated man. “What is this that comes?”
“The old man and a dynamiter,” Pablo told him and lowered the pack inside the
entrance to the cave. Anselmo lowered his pack, too, and Robert Jordan unslung the
rifle and leaned it against the rock.
“Don’t leave it so close to the cave,” the whittling man, who had blue eyes in a dark,
good-looking lazy gypsy face, the color of smoked leather, said. “There’s a fire in there.”
“Get up and put it away thyself,” Pablo said. “Put it by that tree.”
The gypsy did not move but said something unprintable, then, “Leave it there. Blow
thyself up,” he said lazily. “Twill cure thy diseases.”
“What do you make?” Robert Jordan sat down by the gypsy. The gypsy showed him. It
was a figure four trap and he was whittling the crossbar for it.
“For foxes,” he said. “With a log for a dead-fall. It breaks their backs.” He grinned at
Jordan. “Like this, see?” He made a motion of the framework of the trap collapsing, the
log falling, then shook his head, drew in his hand, and spread his arms to show the fox
with a broken back. “Very practical,” he explained.
“He catches rabbits,” Anselmo said. “He is a gypsy. So if he catches rabbits he says it
is foxes. If he catches a fox he would say it was an elephant.”
“And if I catch an elephant?” the gypsy asked and showed his white teeth again and
winked at Robert Jordan.
“You’d say it was a tank,” Anselmo told him.
“I’ll get a tank,” the gypsy told him. “I will get a tank. And you can say it is what you
please.”
“Gypsies talk much and kill little,” Anselmo told him.
The gypsy winked at Robert Jordan and went on whittling.
Pablo had gone in out of sight in the cave. Robert Jordan hoped he had gone for food.
He sat on the ground by the gypsy and the afternoon sunlight came down through the
tree tops and was warm on his outstretched legs. He could smell food now in the cave,“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 12
the smell of oil and of onions and of meat frying and his stomach moved with hunger
inside of him.
“We can get a tank,” he said to the gypsy. “It is not too difficult.”
“With this?” the gypsy pointed toward the two sacks.
“Yes,” Robert Jordan told him. “I will teach you. You make a trap. It is not too difficult.”
“You and me?”
“Sure,” said Robert Jordan. “Why not?”
“Hey,” the gypsy said to Anselmo. “Move those two sacks to where they will be safe,
will you? They’re valuable.”
Anselmo grunted. “I am going for wine,” he told Robert Jordan. Robert Jordan got up
and lifted the sacks away from the cave entrance and leaned them, one on each side of
a tree trunk. He knew what was in them and he never liked to see them close together.
“Bring a cup for me,” the gypsy told him.
“Is there wine?” Robert Jordan asked, sitting down again by the gypsy.
“Wine? Why not? A whole skinful. Half a skinful, anyway.”
“And what to eat?”
“Everything, man,” the gypsy said. “We eat like generals.”
“And what do gypsies do in the war?” Robert Jordan asked him.
“They keep on being gypsies.”
“That’s a good job.”
“The best,” the gypsy said. “How do they call thee?”
“Roberto. And thee?”
“Rafael. And this of the tank is serious?”
“Surely. Why not?”
Anselmo came out of the mouth of the cave with a deep stone basin full of red wine
and with his fingers through the handles of three cups. “Look,” he said. “They have cups
and all.” Pablo came out behind them.
“There is food soon,” he said. “Do you have tobacco?”
Robert Jordan went over to the packs and opening one, felt inside an inner pocket and
brought out one of the flat boxes of Russian cigarettes he had gotten at Golz’s
headquarters. He ran his thumbnail around the edge of the box and, opening the lid,
handed them to Pablo who took half a dozen. Pablo, holding them in one of his huge
hands, picked one up and looked at it against the light. They were long narrow
cigarettes with pasteboard cylinders for mouthpieces.
“Much air and little tobacco,” he said. “I know these. The other with the rare name had
them.”
“Kashkin,” Robert Jordan said and offered the cigarettes to the gypsy and Anselmo,
who each took one.
“Take more,” he said and they each took another. He gave them each four more, they
making a double nod with the hand holding the cigarettes so that the cigarette dipped its
end as a man salutes with a sword, to thank him.
“Yes,” Pablo said. “It was a rare name.”
“Here is the wine.” Anselmo dipped a cup out of the bowl and handed it to Robert
Jordan, then dipped for himself and the gypsy.
“Is there no wine for me?” Pablo asked. They were all sitting together by the cave
entrance.
Anselmo handed him his cup and went into the cave for another. Coming out he
leaned over the bowl and dipped the cup full and they all touched cup edges.
The wine was good, tasting faintly resinous from the wineskin, but excellent, light and
clean on his tongue. Robert Jordan drank it slowly, feeling it spread warmly through his
tiredness.
“The food comes shortly,” Pablo said. “And this foreigner with the rare name, how did
he die?”
“He was captured and he killed himself.”
“How did that happen?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 13
“He was wounded and he did not wish to be a prisoner.”
“What were the details?”
“I don’t know,” he lied. He knew the details very well and he knew they would not
make good talking now.
“He made us promise to shoot him in case he were wounded at the business of the
train and should be unable to get away,” Pablo said. “He spoke in a very rare manner.”
He must have been jumpy even then, Robert Jordan thought. Poor old Kashkin.
“He had a prejudice against killing himself,” Pablo said. “He told me that. Also he had
a great fear of being tortured.”
“Did he tell you that, too?” Robert Jordan asked him.
“Yes,” the gypsy said. “He spoke like that to all of us.”
“Were you at the train, too?”
“Yes. All of us were at the train.”
“He spoke in a very rare manner,” Pablo said. “But he was very brave.”
Poor old Kashkin, Robert Jordan thought. He must have been doing more harm than
good around here. I wish I would have known he was that jumpy as far back as then.
They should have Pulled him out. You can’t have people around doing this sort of Work
and talking like that. That is no way to talk. Even if they accomplish their mission they
are doing more harm than good, talking that sort of stuff.
“He was a little strange,” Robert Jordan said. “I think he was a little crazy.”
“But very dexterous at producing explosions,” the gypsy said. “And very brave.”
“But crazy,” Robert Jordan said. “In this you have to have very much head and be very
cold in the head. That was no way to talk.”
“And you,” Pablo said. “If you are wounded in such a thing as this bridge, you would
be willing to be left behind?”
“Listen,” Robert Jordan said and, leaning forward, he dipped himself another cup of
the wine. “Listen to me clearly. If ever I should have any little favors to ask of any man, I
will ask him at the time.”
“Good,” said the gypsy approvingly. “In this way speak the good ones. Ah! Here it
comes.”
“You have eaten,” said Pablo.
“And I can eat twice more,” the gypsy told him. “Look now who brings it.”
The girl stooped as she came out of the cave mouth carrying the big iron cooking
platter and Robert Jordan saw her face turned at an angle and at the same time saw the
strange thing about her. She smiled and said, “Hola, Comrade,” and Robert Jordan said,
“Salud,” and was careful not to stare and not to look away. She set down the flat iron
platter in front of him and he noticed her handsome brown hands. Now she looked him
full in the face and smiled. Her teeth were white in her brown face and her skin and her
eyes were the same golden tawny brown. She had high cheekbones, merry eyes and a
straight mouth with full lips. Her hair was the golden brown of a grain field that has been
burned dark in the sun but it was cut short all over her head so that it was but little
longer than the fur on a beaver pelt. She smiled in Robert Jordan’s face and put her
brown hand up and ran it over her head, flattening the hair which rose again as her hand
passed. She has a beautiful face, Robert Jordan thought. She’d be beautiful if they
hadn’t cropped her hair.
“That is the way I comb it,” she said to Robert Jordan and laughed. “Go ahead and
eat. Don’t stare at me. They gave me this haircut in Valladolid. It’s almost grown out
now.”
She sat down opposite him and looked at him. He looked back at her and she smiled
and folded her hands together over her knees. Her legs slanted long and clean from the
open cuffs of the trousers as she sat with her hands across her knees and he could see
the shape of her small up-tilted breasts under the gray shirt. Every time Robert Jordan
looked at her he could feel a thickness in his throat.
“There are no plates,” Anselmo said. “Use your own knife.” The girl had leaned four
forks, tines down, against the sides of the iron dish.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 14
They were all eating out of the platter, not speaking, as is the Spanish custom. It was
rabbit cooked with onions and green peppers and there were chick peas in the red wine
sauce. It was well cooked, the rabbit meat flaked off the bones, and the sauce was
delicious. Robert Jordan drank another cup of wine while he ate. The girl watched him
all through the meal. Every one else was watching his food and eating. Robert Jordan
wiped up the last of the sauce in front of him with a piece of bread, piled the rabbit
bones to one side, wiped the spot where they had been for sauce, then wiped his fork
clean with the bread, wiped his knife and put it away and ate the bread. He leaned over
and dipped his cup full of wine and the girl still watched him.
Robert Jordan drank half the cup of wine but the thickness still came in his throat
when he spoke to the girl.
“How art thou called?” he asked. Pablo looked at him quickly when he heard the tone
of his voice. Then he got up and walked away.
“Maria. And thee?”
“Roberto. Have you been long in the mountains?”
“Three months.”
“Three months?” He looked at her hair, that was as thick and short and rippling when
she passed her hand over it, now in embarrassment, as a grain field in the wind on a
hillside. “It was shaved,” she said. “They shaved it regularly in the prison at Valladolid. It
has taken three months to grow to this. I was on the train. They were taking me to the
south. Many of the prisoners were caught after the train was blown up but I was not. I
came With these.”
“I found her hidden in the rocks,” the gypsy said. “It was when we were leaving. Man,
but this one was ugly. We took her along but many times I thought we would have to
leave her.”
“And the other one who was with them at the train?” asked Maria. “The other blond
one. The foreigner. Where is he?”
“Dead,” Robert Jordan said. “In April.”
“In April? The train was in April.”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “He died ten days after the train.”
“Poor man,” she said. “He was very brave. And you do that same business?”
“Yes.”
“You have done trains, too?”
“Yes. Three trains.”
“Here?”
“In Estremadura,” he said. “I was in Estremadura before I came here. We do very
much in Estremadura. There are many of us working in Estremadura.”
“And why do you come to these mountains now?”
“I take the place of the other blond one. Also I know this country from before the
movement.”
“You know it well?”
“No, not really well. But I learn fast. I have a good map and I have a good guide.”
“The old man,” she nodded. “The old man is very good.”
“Thank you,” Anselmo said to her and Robert Jordan realized suddenly that he and
the girl were not alone and he realized too that it was hard for him to look at her
because it made his voice change so. He was violating the second rule of the two rules
for getting on well with people that speak Spanish; give the men tobacco and leave the
women alone; and he realized, very suddenly, that he did not care. There were so many
things that he had not to care about, why should he care about that?
“You have a very beautiful face,” he said to Maria. “I wish I would have had the luck to
see you before your hair was cut.”
“It will grow out,” she said. “In six months it will be long enough.”
“You should have seen her when we brought her from the train. She was so ugly it
would make you sick.”
“Whose woman are you?” Robert Jordan asked, trying not to pull out of it. “Are you“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 15
Pablo’s?”
She looked at him and laughed, then slapped him on the knee.
“Of Pablo? You have seen Pablo?”
“Well, then, of Rafael. I have seen Rafael.”
“Of Rafael neither.”
“Of no one,” the gypsy said. “This is a very strange woman. Is of no one. But she
cooks well.”
“Really of no one?” Robert Jordan asked her.
“Of no one. No one. Neither in joke nor in seriousness. Nor of thee either.”
“No?” Robert Jordan said and he could feel the thickness coming in his throat again.
“Good. I have no time for any woman. That is true.”
“Not fifteen minutes?” the gypsy asked teasingly. “Not a quarter of an hour?” Robert
Jordan did not answer. He looked at the girl, Maria, and his throat felt too thick for him to
trust himself to speak.
Maria looked at him and laughed, then blushed suddenly but kept on looking at him.
“You are blushing,” Robert Jordan said to her. “Do you blush much?”
“Never.”
“You are blushing now.”
“Then I will go into the cave.”
“Stay here, Maria.”
“No,” she said and did not smile at him. “I will go into the cave now.” She picked up the
iron plate they had eaten from and the four forks. She moved awkwardly as a colt
moves, but with that same grace as of a young animal.
“Do you want the cups?” she asked.
Robert Jordan was still looking at her and she blushed again.
“Don’t make me do that,” she said. “I do not like to do that.”
“Leave them,” they gypsy said to her. “Here,” he dipped into the stone bowl and
handed the full cup to Robert Jordan who Watched the girl duck her head and go into
the cave carrying the heavy iron dish.
“Thank you,” Robert Jordan said. His voice was all right again, now that she was
gone. “This is the last one. We’ve had enough of this.”
“We will finish the bowl,” the gypsy said. “There is over half a skin. We packed it in on
one of the horses.”
“That was the last raid of Pablo,” Anselmo said. “Since then he has done nothing.”
“How many are you?” Robert Jordan asked.
“We are seven and there are two women.”
“Two?”
“Yes. The mujer of Pablo.”
“And she?”
“In the cave. The girl can cook a little. I said she cooks well to please her. But mostly
she helps the mujer of Pablo.”
“And how is she, the mujer of Pablo?”
“Something barbarous,” the gypsy grinned. “Something very barbarous. If you think
Pablo is ugly you should see his woman. But brave. A hundred times braver than Pablo.
But something barbarous.”
“Pablo was brave in the beginning,” Anselmo said. “Pablo was something serious in
the beginning.”
“He killed more people than the cholera,” the gypsy said. “At the start of the
movement, Pablo killed more people than the typhoid fever.”
“But since a long time he is muy flojo,” Anselmo said. “He is very flaccid. He is very
much afraid to die.”
“It is possible that it is because he has killed so many at the beginning,” the gypsy said
philosophically. “Pablo killed more than the bubonic plague.”
“That and the riches,” Anselmo said. “Also he drinks very much. Now he would like to
retire like a matador de toros. Like a bullfighter. But he cannot retire.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 16
“If he crosses to the other side of the lines they will take his horses and make him go
in the army,” the gypsy said. “In me there is no love for being in the army either.”
“Nor is there in any other gypsy,” Anselmo said.
“Why should there be?” the gypsy asked. “Who wants to be in an army? Do we make
the revolution to be in an army? I am willing to fight but not to be in an army.”
“Where are the others?” asked Robert Jordan. He felt comfortable and sleepy now
from the wine and lying back on the floor of the forest he saw through the tree tops the
small afternoon clouds of the mountains moving slowly in the high Spanish sky.
“There are two asleep in the cave,” the gypsy said. “Two are on guard above where
we have the gun. One is on guard below. They are probably all asleep.”
Robert Jordan rolled over on his side.
“What kind of a gun is it?”
“A very rare name,” the gypsy said. “It has gone away from me for the moment. It is a
machine gun.”
It must be an automatic rifle, Robert Jordan thought.
“How much does it weigh?” he asked.
“One man can carry it but it is heavy. It has three legs that fold. We got it in the last
serious raid. The one before the wine.”
“How many rounds have you for it?”
“An infinity,” the gypsy said. “One whole case of an unbelievable heaviness.”
Sounds like about five hundred rounds, Robert Jordan thought.
“Does it feed from a pan or a belt?”
“From round iron cans on the top of the gun.”
Hell, it’s a Lewis gun, Robert Jordan thought.
“Do you know anything about a machine gun?” he asked the old man.
“Nada,” said Anselmo. “Nothing.”
“And thou?” to the gypsy.
“That they fire with much rapidity and become so hot the barrel burns the hand that
touches it,” the gypsy said proudly.
“Every one knows that,” Anselmo said with contempt.
“Perhaps,” the gypsy said. “But he asked me to tell what I know about a máquina and I
told him.” Then he added, “Also, unlike an ordinary rifle, they continue to fire as long as
you exert pressure on the trigger.”
“Unless they jam, run out of ammunition or get so hot they melt,” Robert Jordan said in
English.
“What do you say?” Anselmo asked him.
“Nothing,” Robert Jordan said. “I was only looking into the future in English.”
“That is something truly rare,” the gypsy said. “Looking into the future in Inglés. Can
you read in the palm of the hand?”
“No,” Robert Jordan said and he dipped another cup of wine. “But if thou canst I wish
thee would read in the palm of my hand and tell me what is going to pass in the next
three days.”
“The mujer of Pablo reads in the hands,” the gypsy said. “But she is so irritable and of
such a barbarousness that I do not know if she will do it.”
Robert Jordan sat up now and took a swallow of the wine.
“Let us see the mujer of Pablo now,” he said. “If it is that bad let us get it over with.”
“I would not disturb her,” Rafael said. “She has a strong hatred for me.”
“Why?”
“She treats me as a time waster.”
“What injustice,” Anselmo taunted.
“She is against gypsies.”
“What an error,” Anselmo said.
“She has gypsy blood,” Rafael said. “She knows of what she speaks.” He grinned.
“But she has a tongue that scalds and that bites like a bull whip. With this tongue she
takes the hide from any one. In strips. She is of an unbelievable barbarousness.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 17
“How does she get along with the girl, Maria?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Good. She likes the girl. But let any one come near her seriously—” He shook his
head and clucked with his tongue.
“She is very good with the girl,” Anselmo said. “She takes good care of her.”
“When we picked the girl up at the time of the train she was very strange,” Rafael said.
“She would not speak and she cried all the time and if any one touched her she would
shiver like a wet dog. Only lately has she been better. Lately she has been much better.
Today she was fine. Just now, talking to you, she was very good. We would have left
her after the train. Certainly it was not worth being delayed by something so sad and
ugly and apparently worthless. But the old woman tied a rope to her and when the girl
thought she could not go further, the old woman beat her with the end of the rope to
make her go. Then when she could not really go further, the old woman carried her over
her shoulder. When the old woman could not carry her, I carried her. We were going up
that hill breast high in the gorse and heather. And when I could no longer carry her,
Pablo carried her. But what the old woman had to say to us to make us do it!” He shook
his head at the memory. “It is true that the girl is long in the legs but is not heavy. The
bones are light and she weighs little. But she weighs enough when we had to carry her
and stop to fire and then carry her again with the old woman lashing at Pablo with the
rope and carrying his rifle, putting it in his hand when he would drop the girl, making him
pick her up again and loading the gun for him while she cursed him; taking the shells
from his pouches and shoving them down into the magazine and cursing him. The dusk
was coming well on then and when the night came it was all right. But it was lucky that
they had no cavalry.”
“It must have been very hard at the train,” Anselmo said. “I was not there,” he
explained to Robert Jordan. “There was the band of Pablo, of El Sordo, whom we will
see tonight, and two other bands of these mountains. I had gone to the other side of the
lines.”
“In addition to the blond one with the rare name—” the gypsy said.
“Kashkin.”
“Yes. It is a name I can never dominate. We had two with a machine gun. They were
sent also by the army. They could not get the gun away and lost it. Certainly it weighed
no more than that girl and if the old woman had been over them they would have gotten
it away.” He shook his head remembering, then went on. “Never in my life have I seen
such a thing as when the explosion Was produced. The train was coming steadily. We
saw it far away. And I had an excitement so great that I cannot tell it. We saw steam
from it and then later came the noise of the whistle. Then it came chu-chu-chu-chu-chu-
chu steadily larger and larger and then, at the moment of the explosion, the front wheels
of the engine rose up and all of the earth seemed to rise in a great cloud of blackness
and a roar and the engine rose high in the cloud of dirt and of the Wooden ties rising in
the air as in a dream and then it fell onto its side like a great wounded animal and there
was an explosion of white steam before the clods of the other explosion had ceased to
fall on us and the máquina commenced to speak ta-tat-tat-ta!” went the gypsy shaking
his two clenched fists up and down in front of him, thumbs up, on an imaginary machine
gun. “Ta! Ta! Tat! Tat! Tat! Ta!” he exulted. “Never in my life have I seen such a thing,
with the troops running from the train and the máquina speaking into them and the men
falling. It was then that I put my hand on the máquina in my excitement and discovered
that the barrel burned and at that moment the old woman slapped me on the side of the
face and said, ‘Shoot, you fool! Shoot or I will kick your brains in!’ Then I commenced to
shoot but it was very hard to hold my gun steady and the troops were running up the far
hill. Later, after we had been down at the train to see what there was to take, an officer
forced some troops back toward us at the point of a pistol. He kept waving the pistol and
shouting at them and we were all shooting at him but no one hit him. Then some troops
lay down and commenced firing and the officer walked up and down behind them with
his pistol and still we could not hit him and the máquina could not fire on him because of
the position of the train. This officer shot two men as they lay and still they would not get“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 18
up and he was cursing them and finally they got up, one two and three at a time and
came running toward us and the train. Then they lay flat again and fired. Then we left,
with the máquina still speaking over us as we left. It was then I found the girl where she
had run from the train to the rocks and she ran with us. It was those troops who hunted
us until that night.”
“It must have been something very hard,” Anselmo said. “Of much emotion.”
“It was the only good thing we have done,” said a deep voice. “What are you doing
now, you lazy drunken obscene unsayable son of an unnameable unmarried gypsy
obscenity? What are you doing?”
Robert Jordan saw a woman of about fifty almost as big as Pablo, almost as wide as
she was tall, in black peasant skirt and waist, with heavy wool socks on heavy legs,
black rope-soled shoes and a brown face like a model for a granite monument. She had
big but nice-looking hands and her thick curly black hair was twisted into a knot on her
neck.
“Answer me,” she said to the gypsy, ignoring the others.
“I was talking to these comrades. This one comes as a dynamiter.”
“I know all that,” the mujer of Pablo said. “Get out of here now and relieve Andrés who
is on guard at the top.”
“Me voy,” the gypsy said. “I go.” He turned to Robert Jordan. “I will see thee at the
hour of eating.”
“Not even in a joke,” said the woman to him. “Three times you have eaten today
according to my count. Go now and send me Andrés.
“Hola,” she said to Robert Jordan and put out her hand and smiled. “How are you and
how is everything in the Republic?”
“Good,” he said and returned her strong hand grip. “Both with me and with the
Republic.”
“I am happy,” she told him. She was looking into his face and smiling and he noticed
she had fine gray eyes. “Do you come for us to do another train?”
“No,” said Robert Jordan, trusting her instantly. “For a bridge.”
“No es nada,” she said. “A bridge is nothing. When do we do another train now that we
have horses?”
“Later. This bridge is of great importance.”
“The girl told me your comrade who was with us at the train is dead.”
“Yes.”
“What a pity. Never have I seen such an explosion. He was a man of talent. He
pleased me very much. It is not possible to do another train now? There are many men
here now in the hills. Too many. It is already hard to get food. It would be better to get
out. And we have horses.”
“We have to do this bridge.”
“Where is it?”
“Quite close.”
“All the better,” the mujer of Pablo said. “Let us blow all the bridges there are here and
get out. I am sick of this place. Here is too much concentration of people. No good can
come of it. Here is a stagnation that is repugnant.”
She sighted Pablo through the trees.
“Borracho!” she called to him. “Drunkard. Rotten drunkard!” She turned back to Robert
Jordan cheerfully. “He’s taken a leather wine bottle to drink alone in the woods,” she
said. “He’s drinking all the time. This life is ruining him. Young man, I am very content
that you have come.” She clapped him on the back. “Ah,” she said. “You’re bigger than
you look,” and ran her hand over his shoulder, feeling the muscle under the flannel shirt.
“Good. I am very content that you have come.”
“And I equally.”
“We will understand each other,” she said. “Have a cup of wine.”
“We have already had some,” Robert Jordan said. “But, will you?”
“Not until dinner,” she said. “It gives me heartburn.” Then she sighted Pablo again.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 19
“Borracho! ” she shouted. “Drunkard!” She turned to Robert Jordan and shook her head.
“He was a very good man,” she told him. “But now he is terminated. And listen to me
about another thing. Be very good and careful about the girl. The Maria. She has had a
bad time. Understandest thou?”
“Yes. Why do you say this?”
“I saw how she was from seeing thee when she came into the cave. I saw her
watching thee before she came out.”
“I joked with her a little.”
“She was in a very bad state,” the woman of Pablo said. “Now she is better, she ought
to get out of here.”
“Clearly, she can be sent through the lines with Anselmo.”
“You and the Anselmo can take her when this terminates.”
Robert Jordan felt the ache in his throat and his voice thickening. “That might be
done,” he said.
The mujer of Pablo looked at him and shook her head. “Ayee. Ayee,” she said. “Are all
men like that?”
“I said nothing. She is beautiful, you know that.”
“No she is not beautiful. But she begins to be beautiful, you mean,” the woman of
Pablo said. “Men. It is a shame to us women that we make them. No. In seriousness.
Are there not homes to care for such as her under the Republic?”
“Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “Good places. On the coast near Valencia. In other places
too. There they will treat her well and she can work with children. There are the children
from evacuated villages. They will teach her the work.”
“That is what I want,” the mujer of Pablo said. “Pablo has a sickness for her already. It
is another thing which destroys him. It lies on him like a sickness when he sees her. It is
best that she goes now.”
“We can take her after this is over.”
“And you will be careful of her now if I trust you? I speak to you as though I knew you
for a long time.”
“It is like that,” Robert Jordan said, “when people understand one another.”
“Sit down,” the woman of Pablo said. “I do not ask any promise because what will
happen, will happen. Only if you will not take her out, then I ask a promise.”
“Why if I would not take her?”
“Because I do not want her crazy here after you will go. I have had her crazy before
and I have enough without that.”
“We will take her after the bridge,” Robert Jordan said. “If we are alive after the bridge,
we will take her.”
“I do not like to hear you speak in that manner. That manner of speaking never brings
luck.”
“I spoke in that manner only to make a promise,” Robert Jordan said. “I am not of
those who speak gloomily.”
“Let me see thy hand,” the woman said. Robert Jordan put his hand out and the
woman opened it, held it in her own big hand, rubbed her thumb over it and looked at it,
carefully, then dropped it. She stood up. He got up too and she looked at him without
smiling.
“What did you see in it?” Robert Jordan asked her. “I don’t believe in it. You won’t
scare me.”
“Nothing,” she told him. “I saw nothing in it.”
“Yes you did. I am only curious. I do not believe in such things.”
“In what do you believe?”
“In many things but not in that.”
“In what?”
“In my work.”
“Yes, I saw that.”
“Tell me what else you saw.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 20
“I saw nothing else,” she said bitterly. “The bridge is very difficult you said?”
“No. I said it is very important.”
“But it can be difficult?”
“Yes. And now I go down to look at it. How many men have you here?”
“Five that are any good. The gypsy is worthless although his intentions are good. He
has a good heart. Pablo I no longer trust.”
“How many men has El Sordo that are good?”
“Perhaps eight. We will see tonight. He is coming here. He is a very practical man. He
also has some dynamite. Not very much, though. You will speak with him.”
“Have you sent for him?”
“He comes every night. He is a neighbor. Also a friend as well as a comrade.”
“What do you think of him?”
“He is a very good man. Also very practical. In the business of the train he was
enormous.”
“And in the other bands?”
“Advising them in time, it should be possible to unite fifty rifles of a certain
dependability.”
“How dependable?”
“Dependable within the gravity of the situation.”
“And how many cartridges per rifle?”
“Perhaps twenty. Depending how many they would bring for this business. If they
would come for this business. Remember thee that in this of a bridge there is no money
and no loot and in thy reservations of talking, much danger, and that afterwards there
must be a moving from these mountains. Many will oppose this of the bridge.”
“Clearly.”
“In this way it is better not to speak of it unnecessarily.”
“I am in accord.”
“Then after thou hast studied thy bridge we will talk tonight with El Sordo.”
“I go down now with Anselmo.”
“Wake him then,” she said. “Do you want a carbine?”
“Thank you,” he told her. “It is good to have but I will not use it. I go to look, not to
make disturbances. Thank you for what you have told me. I like very much your way of
speaking.”
“I try to speak frankly.”
“Then tell me what you saw in the hand.”
“No,” she said and shook her head. “I saw nothing. Go now to thy bridge. I will look
after thy equipment.”
“Cover it and that no one should touch it. It is better there than in the cave.”
“It shall be covered and no one shall touch it,” the woman of Pablo said. “Go now to
thy bridge.”
“Anselmo,” Robert Jordan said, putting his hand on the shoulder of the old man who
lay sleeping, his head on his arms.
The old man looked up. “Yes,” he said. “Of course. Let us go.”
3
They came down the last two hundred yards, moving carefully from tree to tree in the
shadows and now, through the last pines of the steep hillside, the bridge was only fifty
yards away. The late afternoon sun that still came over the brown shoulder of the
mountain showed the bridge dark against the steep emptiness of the gorge. It was a
steel bridge of a single span and there was a sentry box at each end. It was wide
enough for two motor cars to pass and it spanned, in solid-flung metal grace, a deep
gorge at the bottom of which, far below, a brook leaped in white water through rocks and
boulders down to the main stream of the pass.
The sun was in Robert Jordan’s eyes and the bridge showed only in outline. Then the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 21
sun lessened and was gone and looking up through the trees at the brown, rounded
height that it had gone behind, he saw, now, that he no longer looked into the glare, that
the mountain slope was a delicate new green and that there were patches of old snow
under the crest.
Then he was watching the bridge again in the sudden short trueness of the little light
that would be left, and studying its construction. The problem of its demolition was not
difficult. As he watched he took out a notebook from his breast pocket and made several
quick line sketches. As he made the drawings he did not figure the charges. He would
do that later. Now he was noting the points where the explosive should be placed in
order to cut the support of the span and drop a section of it into the gorge. It could be
done unhurriedly, scientifically and correctly with a half dozen charges laid and braced
to explode simultaneously; or it could be done roughly with two big ones. They would
need to be very big ones, on opposite sides and should go at the same time. He
sketched quickly and happily; glad at last to have the problem under his hand; glad at
last actually to be engaged upon it. Then he shut his notebook, pushed the pencil into its
leather holder in the edge of the flap, put the notebook in his pocket and buttoned the
pocket.
While he had sketched, Anselmo had been watching the road, the bridge and the
sentry boxes. He thought they had come too close to the bridge for safety and when the
sketching was finished, he was relieved.
As Robert Jordan buttoned the flap of his pocket and then lay flat behind the pine
trunk, looking out from behind it, Anselmo put his hand on his elbow and pointed with
one finger.
In the sentry box that faced toward them up the road, the sentry was sitting holding his
rifle, the bayonet fixed, between his knees. He was smoking a cigarette and he wore a
knitted cap and blanket style cape. At fifty yards, you could not see anything about his
face. Robert Jordan put up his field glasses, shading the lenses carefully with his
cupped hands even though there was now no sun to make a glint, and there was the rail
of the bridge as clear as though you could reach out and touch it and there was the face
of the senty so clear he could see the sunken cheeks, the ash on the cigarette and the
greasy shine of the bayonet. It was a peasant’s face, the cheeks hollow under the high
cheekbones, the beard stubbled, the eyes shaded by the heavy brows, big hands
holding the rifle, heavy boots showing beneath the folds of the blanket cape. There was
a worn, blackened leather wine bottle on the wall of the sentry box, there were some
newspapers and there was no telephone. There could, of course, be a telephone on the
side he could not see; but there were no wires running from the box that were visible. A
telephone line ran along the road and its wires were carried over the bridge. There was
a charcoal brazier outside the sentry box, made from an old petrol tin with the top cut off
and holes punched in it, which rested on two stones; but he held no fire. There were
some fire-blackened empty tins in the ashes under it.
Robert Jordan handed the glasses to Anselmo who lay flat beside him. The old man
grinned and shook his head. He tapped his skull beside his eye with one finger.
“Ya lo veo,” he said in Spanish. “I have seen him,” speaking from the front of his
mouth with almost no movement of his lips in the way that is quieter than any whisper.
He looked at the sentry as Robert Jordan smiled at him and, pointing with one finger,
drew the other across his throat. Robert Jordan nodded but he did not smile.
The sentry box at the far end of the bridge faced away from them and down the road
and they could not see into it. The road, which was broad and oiled and well
constructed, made a turn to the left at the far end of the bridge and then swung out of
sight around a curve to the right. At this point it was enlarged from the old road to its
present width by cutting into the solid bastion of the rock on the far side of the gorge;
and its left or western edge, looking down from the pass and the bridge, was marked
and protected by a line of upright cut blocks of stone where its edge fell sheer away to
the gorge. The gorge was almost a canyon here, where the brook, that the bridge was
flung over, merged with the main stream of the pass.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 22
“And the other post?” Robert Jordan asked Anselmo.
“Five hundred meters below that turn. In the roadmender’s hut that is built into the side
of the rock.”
“How many men?” Robert Jordan asked.
He was watching the sentry again with his glasses. The sentry rubbed his cigarette out
on the plank wall of the box, then took a leather tobacco pouch from his pocket, opened
the paper of the dead cigarette and emptied the remnant of used tobacco into the
pouch. The sentry stood up, leaned his rifle against the wall of the box and stretched,
then picked up his rifle, slung it over his shoulder and walked out onto the bridge.
Anselmo flattened on the ground and Robert Jordan slipped his glasses into his shirt
pocket and put his head well behind the pine tree.
“There are seven men and a corporal,” Anselmo said close to his ear. “I informed
myself from the gypsy.”
“We will go now as soon as he is quiet,” Robert Jordan said. “We are too close.”
“Hast thou seen what thou needest?”
“Yes. All that I need.”
It was getting cold quickly now with the sun down and the light was failing as the
afterglow from the last sunlight on the mountains behind them faded.
“How does it look to thee?” Anselmo said softly as they watched the sentry walk
across the bridge toward the other box, his bayonet bright in the last of the afterglow, his
figure unshapely in the blanket coat.
“Very good,” Robert Jordan said. “Very, very good.”
“I am glad,” Anselmo said. “Should we go? Now there is no chance that he sees us.”
The sentry was standing, his back toward them, at the far end of the bridge. From the
gorge came the noise of the stream in the boulders. Then through this noise came
another noise, a steady, racketing drone and they saw the sentry looking up, his knitted
cap slanted back, and turning their heads and looking up they saw, high in the evening
sky, three monoplanes in V formation, showing minute and silvery at that height where
there still was sun, passing unbelievably quickly across the sky, their motors now
throbbing steadily.
“Ours?” Anselmo asked.
“They seem so,” Robert Jordan said but knew that at that height you never could be
sure. They could be an evening patrol of either side. But you always said pursuit planes
were ours because it made people feel better. Bombers were another matter.
Anselmo evidently felt the same. “They are ours,” he said. “I recognize them. They are
Moscas.”
“Good,” said Robert Jordan. “They seem to me to be Moscas, too.”
“They are Moscas,” Anselmo said.
Robert Jordan could have put the glasses on them and been sure instantly but he
preferred not to. It made no difference to him who they were tonight and if it pleased the
old man to have them be ours, he did not want to take them away. Now, as they moved
out of sight toward Segovia, they did not look to be the green, red wing-tipped, low wing
Russian conversion of the Boeing P32 that the Spaniards called Moscas. You could not
see the colors but the cut was wrong. No. It was a Fascist Patrol coming home.
The sentry was still standing at the far box with his back turned.
“Let us go,” Robert Jordan said. He started up the hill, moving carefully and taking
advantage of the cover until they were out of sight. Anselmo followed him at a hundred
yards distance. When they were well out of sight of the bridge, he stopped and the old
man came up and went into the lead and climbed steadily through the pass, up the
steep slope in the dark.
“We have a formidable aviation,” the old man said happily.
“Yes.”
“And we will win.”
“We have to win.”
“Yes. And after we have won you must come to hunt.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 23
“To hunt what?”
“The boar, the bear, the wolf, the ibex—”
“You like to hunt?”
“Yes, man. More than anything. We all hunt in my village. You do not like to hunt?”
“No,” said Robert Jordan. “I do not like to kill animals.”
“With me it is the opposite,” the old man said. “I do not like to kill men.”
“Nobody does except those who are disturbed in the head,” Robert Jordan said. “But I
feel nothing against it when it is necessary. When it is for the cause.”
“It is a different thing, though,” Anselmo said. “In my house, when I had a house, and
now I have no house, there were the tusks of boar I had shot in the lower forest. There
were the hides of wolves I had shot. In the winter, hunting them in the snow. One very
big one, I killed at dusk in the outskirts of the village on my way home one night in
November. There were four wolf hides on the floor of my house. They were worn by
stepping on them but they were wolf hides. There were the horns of ibex that I had killed
in the high Sierra, and there was an eagle stuffed by an embalmer of birds of Avila, with
his wings spread, and eyes as yellow and real as the eyes of an eagle alive. It was a
very beautiful thing and all of those things gave me great pleasure to contemplate.”
“Yes,” said Robert Jordan.
“On the door of the church of my village was nailed the paw of a bear that I killed in
the spring, finding him on a hillside in the snow, overturning a log with this same paw.”
“When was this?”
“Six years ago. And every time I saw that paw, like the hand of a man, but with those
long claws, dried and nailed through the palm to the door of the church, I received a
pleasure.”
“Of pride?”
“Of pride of remembrance of the encounter with the bear on that hillside in the early
spring. But of the killing of a man, who is a man as we are, there is nothing good that
remains.”
“You can’t nail his paw to the church,” Robert Jordan said.
“No. Such a barbarity is unthinkable. Yet the hand of a man is like the paw of a bear.”
“So is the chest of a man like the chest of a bear,” Robert Jordan said. “With the hide
removed from the bear, there are many similarities in the muscles.”
“Yes,” Anselmo said. “The gypsies believe the bear to be a brother of man.”
“So do the Indians in America,” Robert Jordan said. “And when they kill a bear they
apologize to him and ask his pardon. They put his skull in a tree and they ask him to
forgive them before they leave it.”
“The gypsies believe the bear to be a brother to man because he has the same body
beneath his hide, because he drinks beer, because he enjoys music and because he
likes to dance.”
“So also believe the Indians.”
“Are the Indians then gypsies?”
“No. But they believe alike about the bear.”
“Clearly. The gypsies also believe he is a brother because he steals for pleasure.”
“Have you gypsy blood?”
“No. But I have seen much of them and clearly, since the movement, more. There are
many in the hills. To them it is not a sin to kill outside the tribe. They deny this but it is
true.”
“Like the Moors.”
“Yes. But the gypsies have many laws they do not admit to having. In the war many
gypsies have become bad again as they were in olden times.”
“They do not understand why the war is made. They do not know for what we fight.”
“No,” Anselmo said. “They only know now there is a war and people may kill again as
in the olden times without a surety of punishment.”
“You have killed?” Robert Jordan asked in the intimacy of the dark and of their day
together.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 24
“Yes. Several times. But not with pleasure. To me it is a sin to kill a man. Even
Fascists whom we must kill. To me there is a great difference between the bear and the
man and I do not believe the wizardry of the gypsies about the brotherhood with
animals. No. I am against all killing of men.”
“Yet you have killed.”
“Yes. And will again. But if I live later, I will try to live in such a way, doing no harm to
any one, that it will be forgiven.”
“By whom?”
“Who knows? Since we do not have God here any more, neither His Son nor the Holy
Ghost, who forgives? I do not know.”
“You have not God any more?”
“No. Man. Certainly not. If there were God, never would He have permitted what I
have seen with my eyes. Let them have God.”
“They claim Him.”
“Clearly I miss Him, having been brought up in religion. But now a man must be
responsible to himself.”
“Then it is thyself who will forgive thee for killing.”
“I believe so,” Anselmo said. “Since you put it clearly in that way I believe that must be
it. But with or without God, I think it is a sin to kill. To take the life of another is to me
very grave. I will do it whenever necessary but I am not of the race of Pablo.”
“To win a war we must kill our enemies. That has always been true.”
“Clearly. In war we must kill. But I have very rare ideas,” Anselmo said.
They were walking now close together in the dark and he spoke softly, sometimes
turning his head as he climbed. “I would not kill even a Bishop. I would not kill a
proprietor of any kind. I would make them work each day as we have worked in the
fields and as we work in the mountains with the timbet all of the rest of their lives. So
they would see what man is born to. That they should sleep where we sleep. That they
should eat as we eat. But above all that they should work. Thus they would learn.”
“And they would survive to enslave thee again.”
“To kill them teaches nothing,” Anselmo said. “You cannot exterminate them because
from their seed comes more with greater hatred. Prison is nothing. Prison only makes
hatred. That all our enemies should learn.”
“But still thou hast killed.”
“Yes,” Anselmo said. “Many times and will again. But not with pleasure and regarding
it as a sin.”
“And the sentry. You joked of killing the sentry.”
“That was in joke. I would kill the sentry. Yes. Certainly and with a clear heart
considering our task. But not with pleasure.”
“We will leave them to those who enjoy it,” Robert Jordan said. “There are eight and
five. That is thirteen for those who enjoy it.”
“There are many of those who enjoy it,” Anselmo said in the dark. “We have many of
those. More of those than of men who would serve for a battle.”
“Hast thou ever been in a battle?”
“Nay,” the old man said. “We fought in Segovia at the start of the movement but we
were beaten and we ran. I ran with the others. We did not truly understand what we
were doing, nor how it should be done. Also I had only a shotgun with cartridges of large
buckshot and the guardia civil had Mausers. I could not hit them with buckshot at a
hundred yards, and at three hundred yards they shot us as they wished as though we
were rabbits. They shot much and well and we were like sheep before them.” He was
silent. Then asked, “Thinkest thou there will be a battle at the bridge?”
“There is a chance.”
“I have never seen a battle without running,” Anselmo said. “I do not know how I would
comport myself. I am an old man and I have wondered.”
“I will respond for thee,” Robert Jordan told him.
“And hast thou been in many battles?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 25
“Several.”
“And what thinkest thou of this of the bridge?”
“First I think of the bridge. That is my business. It is not difficult to destroy the bridge.
Then we will make the dispositions for the rest. For the preliminaries. It will all be
written.”
“Very few of these people read,” Anselmo said.
“It will be written for every one’s knowledge so that all know, but also it will be clearly
explained.”
“I will do that to which I am assigned,” Anselmo said. “But remembering the shooting
in Segovia, if there is to be a battle or even much exchanging of shots, I would wish to
have it very clear what I must do under all circumstances to avoid running. I remember
that I had a great tendency to run at Segovia.”
“We will be together,” Robert Jordan told him. “I will tell you what there is to do at all
times.”
“Then there is no problem,” Anselmo said. “I can do anything that I am ordered.”
“For us will be the bridge and the battle, should there be one,” Robert Jordan said and
saying it in the dark, he felt a little theatrical but it sounded well in Spanish.
“It should be of the highest interest,” Anselmo said and hearing him say it honestly and
clearly and with no pose, neither the English pose of understatement nor any Latin
bravado, Robert Jordan thought he was very lucky to have this old man and having
seen the bridge and worked out and simplified the problem it would have been to
surprise the posts and blow it in a normal way, he resented Golz’s orders, and the
necessity for them. He resented them for what they could do to him and for what they
could do to this old man. They were bad orders all right for those who would have to
carry them out.
And that is not the way to think, he told himself, and there is not you, and there are no
people that things must not happen to. Neither you nor this old man is anything. You are
instruments to do your duty. There are necessary orders that are no fault of yours and
there is a bridge and that bridge can be the point on which the future of the human race
can turn. As it can turn on everything that happens in this war. You have only one thing
to do and you must do it. Only one thing, hell, he thought. If it were one thing it was
easy. Stop worrying, you windy bastard, he said to himself. Think about something else.
So he thought about the girl Maria, with her skin, the hair and the eyes all the same
golden tawny brown, the hair a little darker than the rest but it would be lighter as her
skin tanned deeper, the smooth skin, pale gold on the surface with a darkness
underneath. Smooth it would be, all of her body smooth, and she moved awkwardly as
though there were something of her and about her that embarrassed her as though it
were visible, though it was not, but only in her mind. And she blushed with he looked at
her, and she sitting, her hands clasped around her knees and the shirt open at the
throat, the cup of her breasts uptilted against the shirt, and as he thought of her, his
throat was choky and there was a difficulty in walking and he and Anselmo spoke no
more until the old man said, “Now we go down through these rocks and to the camp.”
As they came through the rocks in the dark, a man spoke to them, “Halt. Who goes?”
They heard a rifle bolt snick as it was drawn back and then the knock against the wood
as it was pushed forward and down on the stock.
“Comrades,” Anselmo said.
“What comrades?”
“Comrades of Pablo,” the old man told him. “Dost thou not know us?”
“Yes,” the voice said. “But it is an order. Have you the password?”
“No. We come from below.”
“I know,” the man said in the dark. “You come from the bridge. I know all of that. The
order is not mine. You must know the second half of a password.”
“What is the first half then?” Robert Jordan said.
“I have forgotten it,” the man said in the dark and laughed. “Go then unprintably to the
campfire with thy obscene dynamite.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 26
“That is called guerilla discipline,” Anselmo said. “Uncock thy piece.”
“It is uncocked,” the man said in the dark. “I let it down with my thumb and forefinger.”
“Thou wilt do that with a Mauser sometime which has no knurl on the bolt and it will
fire.”
“This is a Mauser,” the man said. “But I have a grip of thumb and forefinger beyond
description. Always I let it down that way.”
“Where is the rifle pointed?” asked Anselmo into the dark.
“At thee,” the man said, “all the time that I descended the bolt. And when thou comest
to the camp, order that some one should relieve me because I have indescribable and
unprintable hunger and I have forgotten the password.”
“How art thou called?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Agustín,” the man said. “I am called Agustín and I am dying with boredom in this
spot.”
“We will take the message,” Robert Jordan said and he thought how the word
aburmiento which means boredom in Spanish was a word no peasant would use in any
other language. Yet it is one of the most common words in the mouth of a Spaniard of
any class.
“Listen to me,” Agustín said, and coming close he put his hand on Robert Jordan’s
shoulder. Then striking a flint and steel together he held it up and blowing on the end of
the cork, looked at the young man’s face in its glow.
“You look like the other one,” he said. “But something different. Listen,” he put the
lighter down and stood holding his rifle. “Tell me this. Is it true about the bridge?”
“What about the bridge?”
“That we blow up an obscene bridge and then have to obscenely well obscenity
ourselves off out of these mountains?”
“I know not.”
“You know not,” Agustín said. “What a barbarity! Whose then is the dynamite?”
“Mine.”
“And knowest thou not what it is for? Don’t tell me tales.”
“I know what it is for and so will you in time,” Robert Jordan said. “But now we go to
the camp.”
“Go to the unprintable,” Agustín said. “And unprint thyself. But do you want me to tell
you something of service to you?”
“Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “If it is not unprintable,” naming the principal obscenity that
had larded the conversation. The man, Agustín, spoke so obscenely, coupling an
obscenity to every noun as an adjective, using the same obscenity as a verb, that
Robert Jordan wondered if he could speak a straight sentence. Agustín laughed in the
dark when he heard the word. “It is a way of speaking I have. Maybe it is ugly. Who
knows? Each one speaks according to his manner. Listen to me. The bridge is nothing
to me. As well the bridge as another thing. Also I have a boredom in these mountains.
That we should go if it is needed. These mountains say nothing to me. That we should
leave them. But I would say one thing. Guard well thy explosive.”
“Thank you,” Robert Jordan said. “From thee?”
“No,” Agustín said. “From people less unprintably equipped than I.”
“So?” asked Robert Jordan.
“You understand Spanish,” Agustín said seriously now. “Care well for thy unprintable
explosive.”
“Thank you.”
“No. Don’t thank me. Look after thy stuff.”
“Has anything happened to it?”
“No, or I would not waste thy time talking in this fashion.”
“Thank you all the same. We go now to camp.”
“Good,” said Agustín, “and that they send some one here who knows the password.”
“Will we see you at the camp?”
“Yes, man. And shortly.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 27
“Come on,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo.
They were walking down the edge of the meadow now and there was a gray mist. The
grass was lush underfoot after the pineneedle floor of the forest and the dew on the
grass wet through their canvas rope-soled shoes. Ahead, through the trees, Robert
Jordan Could see a light where he knew the mouth of the cave must be.
“Agustín is a very good man,” Anselmo said. “He speaks very filthily and always in
jokes but he is a very serious man.”
“You know him well?”
“Yes. For a long time. I have much confidence in him.”
“And what he says?”
“Yes, man. This Pablo is bad now, as you could see.”
“And the best thing to do?”
“One shall guard it at all times.”
“Who?”
“You. Me. The woman and Agustín. Since he sees the danger.”
“Did you think things were as bad as they are here?”
“No,” Anselmo said. “They have gone bad very fast. But it was necessary to come
here. This is the country of Pablo and of El Sordo. In their country we must deal with
them unless it is something that can be done alone.”
“And El Sordo?”
“Good,” Anselmo said. “As good as the other is bad.”
“You believe now that he is truly bad?”
“All afternoon I have thought of it and since we have heard what we have heard, I
think now, yes. Truly.”
“It would not be better to leave, speaking of another bridge, and obtain men from other
bands?”
“No,” Anselmo said. “This is his country. You could not move that he would not know
it. But one must move with much precautions.”
4
They came down to the mouth of the cave, where a light shone out from the edge of a
blanket that hung over the opening. The two packs were at the foot of the tree covered
with a canvas and Robert Jordan knelt down and felt the canvas wet and stiff over them.
In the dark he felt under the canvas in the outside pocket of one of the packs and took
out a leather-covered flask and slipped it in his pocket. Unlocking the long barred
padlocks that passed through the grommet that closed the opening of the mouth of the
packs, and untying the drawstring at the top of each pack, he felt inside them and
verified their contents with his hands. Deep in one pack he felt the bundled blocks in the
sacks, the sacks wrapped in the sleeping robe, and tying the strings of that and pushing
the lock shut again, he put his hands into the other and felt the sharp wood outline of the
box of the old exploder, the cigar box with the caps, each little cylinder wrapped round
and round with its two wires (the lot of them packed as carefully as he had packed his
collection of wild bird eggs when he was a boy), the stock of the submachine gun,
disconnected from the barrel and wrapped in his leather jacket, the two pans and five
clips in one of the inner pockets of the big pack-sack arid the small coils of copper wire
and the big coil of light insulated Wire in the other. In the pocket with the wire he felt his
pliers and the two wooden awls for making holes in the end of the blocks and then, from
the last inside pocket, he took a big box of the Russian cigarettes of the lot he had from
Golz’s headquarters and tying the mouth of the pack shut, he pushed the lock in,
buckled the flaps down and again covered both packs with the canvas. Anselmo had
gone on into the cave.
Robert Jordan stood up to follow him, then reconsidered and, lifting the canvas off the
two packs, picked them up, one in each hand, and started with them, just able to carry
them, for the mouth of the cave. He laid one pack down and lifted the blanket aside,“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 28
then with his head stooped and with a pack in each hand, carrying by the leather
shoulder straps, he went into the cave.
It was warm and smoky in the cave. There was a table along one wall with a tallow
candle stuck in a bottle on it and at the table were seated Pablo, three men he did not
know, and the gypsy, Rafael. The candle made shadows on the wall behind the men
and Anselmo stood where he had come in to the right of the table. The wife of Pablo
was standing over the charcoal fire on the open fire hearth in the corner of the cave. The
girl knelt by her stirring in an iron pot. She lifted the wooden spoon out and looked at
Robert Jordan as he stood there in the doorway and he saw, in the glow from the fire
the woman was blowing with a bellows, the girl’s face, her arm and the drops running
down from the spoon and dropping into the iron pot.
“What do you carry?” Pablo said.
“My things,” Robert Jordan said and set the two packs down a little way apart where
the cave opened out on the side away from the table.
“Are they not well outside?” Pablo asked.
“Some one might trip over them in the dark,” Robert Jordan said and walked over to
the table and laid the box of cigarettes on it.
“I do not like to have dynamite here in the cave,” Pablo said.
“It is far from the fire,” Robert Jordan said. “Take some cigarettes.” He ran his
thumbnail along the side of the paper box with the big colored figure of a warship on the
cover and pushed the box toward Pablo.
Anselmo brought him a rawhide-covered stool and he sat down at the table. Pablo
looked at him as though he were going to speak again, then reached for the cigarettes.
Robert Jordan pushed them toward the others. He was not looking at them yet. But he
noted one man took cigarettes and two did not. All of his concentration was on Pablo.
“How goes it, gypsy?” he said to Rafael.
“Good,” the gypsy said. Robert Jordan could tell they had been talking about him
when he came in. Even the gypsy was not at ease.
“She is going to let you eat again?” Robert Jordan asked the gypsy.
“Yes. Why not?” the gypsy said. It was a long way from the friendly joking they had
together in the afternoon.
The woman of Pablo said nothing and went on blowing up the coals of the fire.
“One called Agustín says he dies of boredom above,” Robert Jordan said.
“That doesn’t kill,” Pablo said. “Let him die a little.”
“Is there wine?” Robert Jordan asked the table at large, leaning forward, his hands on
the table.
“There is little left,” Pablo said sullenly. Robert Jordan decided he had better look at
the other three and try to see where he stood.
“In that case, let me have a cup of water. Thou,” he called to the girl. “Bring me a cup
of water.”
The girl looked at the woman, who said nothing, and gave no sign of having heard,
then she went to a kettle containing water and dipped a cup full. She brought it to the
table and put it down before him. Robert Jordan smiled at her. At the same time he
sucked in on his stomach muscles and swung a little to the left on his stool so that his
pistol slipped around on his belt closer to where he wanted it. He reached his hand
down toward his hip pocket and Pablo watched him. He knew they all were watching
him, too, but he watched only Pablo. His hand came up from the hip pocket with the
leather-covered flask and he unscrewed the top and then, lifting the cup, drank half the
water and poured very Slowly from the flask into the cup.
“It is too strong for thee or I would give thee some,” he said to the girl and smiled at
her again. “There is little left or I would offer some to thee,” he said to Pablo.
“I do not like anis,” Pablo said.
The acrid smell had carried across the table and he had picked out the one familiar
component.
“Good,” said Robert Jordan. “Because there is very little left.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 29
“What drink is that?” the gypsy asked.
“A medicine,” Robert Jordan said. “Do you want to taste it?”
“What is it for?”
“For everything,” Robert Jordan said. “It cures everything. If you have anything wrong
this will cure it.”
“Let me taste it,” the gypsy said.
Robert Jordan pushed the cup toward him. It was a milky yellow now with the water
and he hoped the gypsy would not take more than a swallow. There was very little of it
left and one cup of it took the place of the evening papers, of all the old evenings in
cafés, of all chestnut trees that would be in bloom now in this month, of the great slow
horses of the outer boulevards, of book shops, of kiosques, and of galleries, of the Parc
Montsouris, of the Stade Buffalo, and of the Butte Chaumont, of the Guaranty Trust
Company and the Ile de la Cite, of Foyot’s old hotel, and of being able to read and relax
in the evening; of all the things he had enjoyed and forgotten and that came back to him
when he tasted that opaque, bitter, tongue-numbing, brain-warming, stomach-warming,
idea-changing liquid alchemy.
The gypsy made a face and handed the cup back. “It smells of anis but it is bitter as
gall,” he said. “It is better to be sick than have that medicine.”
“That’s the wormwood,” Robert Jordan told him. “In this, the real absinthe, there is
wormwood. It’s supposed to rot your brain out but I don’t believe it. It only changes the
ideas. You should pour water into it very slowly, a few drops at a time. But I poured it
into the water.”
“What are you saying?” Pablo said angrily, feeling the mockery.
“Explaining the medicine,” Robert Jordan told him and grinned. “I bought it in Madrid. It
was the last bottle and it’s lasted me three weeks.” He took a big swallow of it and felt it
coasting over his tongue in delicate anxsthesia. He looked at Pablo and grinned again.
“How’s business?” he asked.
Pablo did not answer and Robert Jordan looked carefully at the other three men at the
table. One had a large flat face, flat and brown as a Serrano ham with a nose flattened
and broken, and the long thin Russian cigarette, projecting at an angle, made the face
look even flatter. This man had short gray hair and a gray stubble of beard and wore the
usual black smock buttoned at the neck. He looked down at the table when Robert
Jordan looked at him but his eyes were steady and they did not blink. The other two
were evidently brothers. They looked much alike and were both short, heavily built, dark
haired, their hair growing low on their foreheads, dark-eyed and brown. One had a scar
across his forehead above his left eye and as he looked at them, they looked back at
him steadily. One looked to be about twenty-six or -eight, the other perhaps two years
older.
“What are you looking at?” one brother, the one with the scar, asked.
“Thee,” Robert Jordan said.
“Do you see anything rare?”
“No,” said Robert Jordan. “Have a cigarette?”
“Why not?” the brother said. He had not taken any before. “These are like the other
had. He of the train.”
“Were you at the train?”
“We were all at the train,” the brother said quietly. “All except the old man.”
“That is what we should do now,” Pablo said. “Another train.”
“We can do that,” Robert Jordan said. “After the bridge.”
He could see that the wife of Pablo had turned now from the fire and was listening.
When he said the word “bridge” every one was quiet.
“After the bridge,” he said again deliberately and took a sip of the absinthe. I might as
well bring it on, he thought. It’s coming anyWay.
“I do not go for the bridge,” Pablo said, looking down at the table. “Neither me nor my
people.”
Robert Jordan said nothing. He looked at Anselmo and raised the cup. “Then we shall“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 30
do it alone, old one,” he said and smiled.
“Without this coward,” Anselmo said.
“What did you say?” Pablo spoke to the old man.
“Nothing for thee. I did not speak to thee,” Anselmo told him.
Robert Jordan now looked past the table to where the wife of Pablo was standing by
the fire. She had said nothing yet, nor given any sign. But now she said something he
could not hear to the girl and the girl rose from the cooking fire, slipped along the wall,
opened the blanket that hung over the mouth of the cave and went out. I think it is going
to come now, Robert Jordan thought. I believe this is it. I did not want it to be this way
but this seems to be the way it is.
“Then we will do the bridge without thy aid,” Robert Jordan said to Pablo.
“No,” Pablo said, and Robert Jordan watched his face sweat. “Thou wilt blow no
bridge here.”
“No?”
“Thou wilt blow no bridge,” Pablo said heavily.
“And thou?” Robert Jordan spoke to the wife of Pablo who was standing, still and
huge, by the fire. She turned toward them and said, “I am for the bridge.” Her face was
lit by the fire and it was flushed and it shone warm and dark and handsome now in the
firelight as it was meant to be.
“What do you say?” Pablo said to her and Robert Jordan saw the betrayed look on his
face and the sweat on his forehead as he turned his head.
“I am for the bridge and against thee,” the wife of Pablo said. “Nothing more.”
“I am also for the bridge,” the man with the flat face and the broken nose said,
crushing the end of the cigarette on the table.
“To me the bridge means nothing,” one of the brothers said. “I am for the mujer of
Pablo.”
“Equally,” said the other brother.
“Equally,” the gypsy said.
Robert Jordan watched Pablo and as he watched, letting his right hand hang lower
and lower, ready if it should be necessary, half hoping it would be (feeling perhaps that
were the simplest and easiest yet not wishing to spoil what had gone so well, knowing
how quickly all of a family, all of a clan, all of a band, can turn against a stranger in a
quarrel, yet thinking what could be done with the hand were the simplest and best and
surgically the most sound now that this had happened), saw also the wife of Pablo
standing there and watched her blush proudly and soundly and healthily as the
allegiances were given.
“I am for the Republic,” the woman of Pablo said happily. “And the Republic is the
bridge. Afterwards we will have time for other projects.”
“And thou,” Pablo said bitterly. “With your head of a seed bull and your heart of a
whore. Thou thinkest there will be an afterwards from this bridge? Thou hast an idea of
that which will pass?”
“That which must pass,” the woman of Pablo said. “That which must pass, will pass.”
“And it means nothing to thee to be hunted then like a beast after this thing from which
we derive no profit? Nor to die in it?”
“Nothing,” the woman of Pablo said. “And do not try to frighten me, coward.”
“Coward,” Pablo said bitterly. “You treat a man as coward because he has a tactical
sense. Because he can see the results of an idiocy in advance. It is not cowardly to
know what is foolish.”
“Neither is it foolish to know what is cowardly,” said Anselmo, unable to resist making
the phrase.
“Do you want to die?” Pablo said to him seriously and Robert Jordan saw how
unrhetorical was the question.
“No.”
“Then watch thy mouth. You talk too much about things you do not understand. Don’t
you see that this is serious?” he said almost pitifully. “Am I the only one who sees the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 31
seriousness of this?”
I believe so, Robert Jordan thought. Old Pablo, old boy, I believe so. Except me. You
can see it and I see it and the woman read it in my hand but she doesn’t see it, yet. Not
yet she doesn’t see it.
“Am I a leader for nothing?” Pablo asked. “I know what I speak of. You others do not
know. This old man talks nonsense. He is an old man who is nothing but a messenger
and a guide for foreigners. This foreigner comes here to do a thing for the good of the
foreigners. For his good we must be sacrificed. I am for the good and the safety of all.”
“Safety,” the wife of Pablo said. “There is no such thing as safety. There are so many
seeking safety here now that they make a great danger. In seeking safety now you lose
all.”
She stood now by the table with the big spoon in her hand.
“There is safety,” Pablo said. “Within the danger there is the safety of knowing what
chances to take. It is like the bullfighter who knowing what he is doing, takes no chances
and is safe.”
“Until he is gored,” the woman said bitterly. “How many times have I heard matadors
talk like that before they took a goring. How often have I heard Finito say that it is all
knowledge and that the bull never gored the man; rather the man gored himself on the
horn of the bull. Always do they talk that way in their arrogance before a goring.
Afterwards we visit them in the clinic.” Now she was mimicking a visit to a bedside,
“Hello, old timer. Hello,” she boomed. Then, “Buenas, Compadre. How goes it, Pilar?”
imitating the weak voice of the wounded bullfighter. “How did this happen, Finito, Chico,
how did this dirty accident occur to thee?” booming it out in her own voice. Then talking
weak and small, “It is nothing, woman. Pilar, it is nothing. It shouldn’t have happened. I
killed him very well, you understand. Nobody could have killed him better. Then having
killed him exactly as I should and him absolutely dead, swaying on his legs, and ready
to fall of his own weight, I walked away from him with a certain amount of arrogance and
much style and from the back he throws me this horn between the cheeks of my
buttocks and it comes out of my liver.” She commenced to laugh, dropping the imitation
of the almost effeminate bullfighter’s voice and booming again now. “You and your
safety! Did I live nine years with three of the worst paid matadors in the world not to
learn about fear and about safety? Speak to me of anything but safety. And thee. What
illusions I put in thee and how they have turned out! From one year of war thou has
become lazy, a drunkard and a coward.”
“In that way thou hast no right to speak,” Pablo said. “And less even before the people
and a stranger.”
“In that way will I speak,” the wife of Pablo went on. “Have you not heard? Do you still
believe that you command here?”
“Yes,” Pablo said. “Here I command.”
“Not in joke,” the woman said. “Here I command! Haven’t you heard la gente? Here no
one commands but me. You can stay if you wish and eat of the food and drink of the
wine, but not too bloody much, and share in the work if thee wishes. But here I
command.”
“I should shoot thee and the foreigner both,” Pablo said suilenly.
“Try it,” the woman said. “And see what happens.”
“A cup of water for me,” Robert Jordan said, not taking his eyes from the man with his
sullen heavy head and the woman standing proudly and confidently holding the big
spoon as authoritatively as though it were a baton.
“Maria,” called the woman of Pablo and when the girl came in the door she said,
“Water for this comrade.”
Robert Jordan reached for his flask and, bringing the flask out, as he brought it he
loosened the pistol in the holster and swung it on top of his thigh. He poured a second
absinthe into his cup and took the cup of water the girl brought him and commenced to
drip it into the cup, a little at a time. The girl stood at his elbow, watching him.
“Outside,” the woman of Pablo said to her, gesturing with the spoon.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 32
“It is cold outside,” the girl said, her cheek close to Robert Jordan’s, watching what
was happening in the cup where the liquor was clouding.
“Maybe,” the woman of Pablo said. “But in here it is too hot.” Then she said, kindly, “It
is not for long.”
The girl shook her head and went out.
I don’t think he is going to take this much more, Robert Jordan thought to himself. He
held the cup in one hand and his other hand rested, frankly now, on the pistol. He had
slipped the safety catch and he felt the worn comfort of the checked grip chafed almost
smooth and touched the round, cool companionship of the trigger guard. Pablo no
longer looked at him but only at the woman. She went on, “Listen to me, drunkard. You
understand who commands here?”
“I command.”
“No. Listen. Take the wax from thy hairy ears. Listen well. I command.”
Pablo looked at her and you could tell nothing of what he was thinking by his face. He
looked at her quite deliberately and then he looked across the table at Robert Jordan.
He looked at him a long time contemplatively and then he looked back at the woman,
again.
“All right. You command,” he said. “And if you want he can command too. And the two
of you can go to hell.” He was looking the woman straight in the face and he was neither
dominated by her nor seemed to be much affected by her. “It is possible that I am lazy
and that I drink too much. You may consider me a coward but there you are mistaken.
But I am not stupid.” He paused. “That you should command and that you should like it.
Now if you are a woman as well as a commander, that we should have something to
eat.”
“Maria,” the woman of Pablo called.
The girl put her head inside the blanket across the cave mouth. “Enter now and serve
the supper.”
The girl came in and walked across to the low table by the hearth and picked up the
enameled-ware bowls and brought them to the table.
“There is wine enough for all,” the woman of Pablo said to Robert Jordan. “Pay no
attention to what that drunkard says. When this is finished we will get more. Finish that
rare thing thou art drinking and take a cup of wine.”
Robert Jordan swallowed down the last of the absinthe, feeling it, gulped that way,
making a warm, small, fume-rising, wet, chemicalchange-producing heat in him and
passed the cup for wine. The girl dipped it full for him and smiled.
“Well, did you see the bridge?” the gypsy asked. The others, who had not opened their
mouths after the change of allegiance, were all leaning forward to listen now.
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “It is something easy to do. Would you like me to show
you?”
“Yes, man. With much interest.”
Robert Jordan took out the notebook from his shirt pocket and showed them the
sketches.
“Look how it seems,” the flat-faced man, who was named Primitivo, said. “It is the
bridge itself.”
Robert Jordan with the point of the pencil explained how the bridge should be blown
and the reason for the placing of the charges.
“What simplicity,” the scarred-faced brother, who was called Andrés, said. “And how
do you explode them?”
Robert Jordan explained that too and, as he showed them, he felt the girl’s arm resting
on his shoulder as she looked. The woman of Pablo was watching too. Only Pablo took
no interest, sitting by himself with a cup of wine that he replenished by dipping into the
big bowl Maria had filled from the wineskin that hung to the left of the entrance to the
cave.
“Hast thou done much of this?” the girl asked Robert Jordan softly.
“Yes.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 33
“And can we see the doing of it?”
“Yes. Why not?”
“You will see it,” Pablo said from his end of the table. “I believe that you will see it.”
“Shut up,” the woman of Pablo said to him and suddenly remembering what she had
seen in the hand in the afternoon she was wildly, unreasonably angry. “Shut up, coward.
Shut up, bad luck bird. Shut up, murderer.”
“Good,” Pablo said. “I shut up. It is thou who commands now and you should continue
to look at the pretty pictures. But remember that I am not stupid.”
The woman of Pablo could feel her rage changing to sorrow and to a feeling of the
thwarting of all hope and promise. She knew this feeling from when she was a girl and
she knew the things that caused it all through her life. It came now suddenly and she put
it away from her and would not let it touch her, neither her nor the Republic, and she
said, “Now we will eat. Serve the bowls from the pot, Maria.”
5
Robert Jordan pushed aside the saddle blanket that hung over the mouth of the cave
and, stepping out, took a deep breath of the cold night air. The mist had cleared away
and the stars were out. There was no wind, and, outside now of the warm air of the
cave, heavy with smoke of both tobacco and charcoal, with the odor of cooked rice and
meat, saffron, pimentos, and oil, the tarry, wine-spilled smell of the big skin hung beside
the door, hung by the neck and the four legs extended, wine drawn from a plug fitted in
one leg, wine that spilled a little onto the earth of the floor, settling the dust smell; out
now from the odors of different herbs whose names he did not know that hung in
bunches from the ceiling, with long ropes of garlic, away now from the copper-penny,
red wine and garlic, horse sweat and man sweat dried in the clothing (acrid and gray the
man sweat, sweet and sickly the dried brushed-off lather of horse sweat), of the men at
the table, Robert Jordan breathed deeply of the clear night air of the mountains that
smelled of the pines and of the dew on the grass in the meadow by the stream. Dew
had fallen heavily since the wind had dropped, but, as he stood there, he thought there
would be frost by morning.
As he stood breathing deep and then listening to the night, he heard first, firing far
away, and then he heard an owl cry in the timber below, where the horse corral was
slung. Then inside the cave he could hear the gypsy starting to sing and the soft
chording of a guitar.
“I had an inheritance from my father,” the artificially hardened voice rose harshly and
hung there. Then went on:
“It was the moon and the sun
“And though I roam all over the world
“The spending of it’s never done.”
The guitar thudded with chorded applause for the singer. “Good,” Robert Jordan heard
some one say. “Give us the Catalan, gypsy.”
“No.”
“Yes. Yes. The Catalan.”
“All right,” the gypsy said and sang mournfully,
“My nose is flat.
“My face is black.
“But still I am a man.”
“Ole!” some one said. “Go on, gypsy!”
The gypsy’s voice rose tragically and mockingly.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 34
“Thank God I am a Negro.
“And not a Catalan!”
“There is much noise,” Pablo’s voice said. “Shut up, gypsy.”
“Yes,” he heard the woman’s voice. “There is too much noise. You could call the
guardia civil with that voice and still it has no quality.”
“I know another verse,” the gypsy said and the guitar commenced
“Save it,” the woman told him.
The guitar stopped.
“I am not good in voice tonight. So there is no loss,” the gypsy said and pushing the
blanket aside he came out into the dark.
Robert Jordan watched him walk over to a tree and then come toward him.
“Roberto,” the gypsy said softly.
“Yes, Rafael,” he said. He knew the gypsy had been affected by the wine from his
voice. He himself had drunk the two absinthes and some wine but his head was clear
and cold from the strain of the difficulty with Pablo.
“Why didst thou not kill Pablo?” the gypsy said very softly.
“Why kill him?”
“You have to kill him sooner or later. Why did you not approve of the moment?”
“Do you speak seriously?”
“What do you think they all waited for? What do you think the woman sent the girl
away for? Do you believe that it is possible to continue after what has been said?”
“That you all should kill him.”
“Qué va,” the gypsy said quietly. “That is your business. Three or four times we waited
for you to kill him. Pablo has no friends.”
“I had the idea,” Robert Jordan said. “But I left it.”
“Surely all could see that. Every one noted your preparations. Why didn’t you do it?”
“I thought it might molest you others or the woman.”
“Qué va. And the woman waiting as a whore waits for the flight of the big bird. Thou
art younger than thou appearest.”
“It is possible.”
“Kill him now,” the gypsy urged.
“That is to assassinate.”
“Even better,” the gypsy said very softly. “Less danger. Go on. Kill him now.”
“I cannot in that way. It is repugnant to me and it is not how one should act for the
cause.”
“Provoke him then,” the gypsy said. “But you have to kill him. There is no remedy.”
As they spoke, the owl flew between the trees with the softness of all silence, dropping
past them, then rising, the wings beating quickly, but with no noise of feathers moving
as the bird hunted.
“Look at him,” the gypsy said in the dark. “Thus should men move.”
“And in the day, blind in a tree with crows around him,” Robert Jordan said.
“Rarely,” said the gypsy. “And then by hazard. Kill him,” he went on. “Do not let it
become difficult.”
“Now the moment is passed.”
“Provoke it,” the gypsy said. “Or take advantage of the quiet.”
The blanket that closed the cave door opened and light came out. Some one came
toward where they stood.
“It is a beautiful night,” the man said in a heavy, dull voice. “We will have good
weather.”
It was Pablo.
He was smoking one of the Russian cigarettes and in the glow, as he drew on the
cigarette, his round face showed. They could see his heavy, long-armed body in the
starlight.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 35
“Do not pay any attention to the woman,” he said to Robert Jordan. In the dark the
cigarette glowed bright, then showed in his hand as he lowered it. “She is difficult
sometimes. She is a good woman. Very loyal to the Republic.” The light of the cigarette
jerked slightly now as he spoke. He must be talking with it in the corner of his mouth,
Robert Jordan thought. “We should have no difficulties. We are of accord. I am glad you
have come.” The cigarette glowed brightly. “Pay no attention to arguments,” he said.
“You are very welcome here.
“Excuse me now,” he said. “I go to see how they have picketed the horses.”
He went off through the trees to the edge of the meadow and they heard a horse
nicker from below.
“You see?” the gypsy said. “Now you see? In this way has the moment escaped.”
Robert Jordan said nothing.
“I go down there,” the gypsy said angrily.
“To do what?”
“Qué va, to do what. At least to prevent him leaving.”
“Can he leave with a horse from below?”
“No.”
“Then go to the spot where you can prevent him.”
“Agustín is there.”
“Go then and speak with Agustín. Tell him that which has happened.”
“Agustín will kill him with pleasure.”
“Less bad,” Robert Jordan said. “Go then above and tell him all as it happened.”
“And then?”
“I go to look below in the meadow.”
“Good. Man. Good,” he could not see Rafael’s face in the dark but he could feel him
smiling. “Now you have tightened your garters,” the gypsy said approvingly.
“Go to Agustín,” Robert Jordan said to him.
“Yes, Roberto, yes,” said the gypsy.
Robert Jordan walked through the pines, feeling his way from tree to tree to the edge
of the meadow. Looking across it in the darkness, lighter here in the open from the
starlight, he saw the dark bulks of the picketed horses. He counted them where they
were scattered between him and the stream. There were five. Robert Jordan sat down
at the foot of a pine tree and looked out across the meadow.
I am tired, he thought, and perhaps my judgment is not good. But my obligation is the
bridge and to fulfill that, I must take no useless risk of myself until I complete that duty.
Of course it is sometimes more of a risk not to accept chances which are necessary to
take but I have done this so far, trying to let the situation take its own course. If it is true,
as the gypsy says, that they expected me to kill Pablo then I should have done that. But
it was never clear to me that they did expect that. For a stranger to kill where he must
work with the people afterwards is very bad. It may be done in action, and it may be
done if backed by sufficient discipline, but in this case I think it would be very bad,
although it was a temptation and seemed a short and simple way. But I do not believe
anything is that short nor that simple in this country and, while I trust the woman
absolutely, I could not tell how she would react to such a drastic thing. One dying in
such a place can be very ugly, dirty and repugnant. You could not tell how she would
react. Without the woman there is no organization nor any discipline here and with the
woman it can be very good. It would be ideal if she would kill him, or if the gypsy would
(but he will not) or if the sentry, Agustín, would. Anselmo will if I ask it, though he says
he is against all killing. He hates him, I believe, and he already trusts me and believes in
me as a representative of what he believes in. Only he and the woman really believe in
the Republic as far as I can see; but it is too early to know that yet.
As his eyes became used to the starlight he could see that Pablo was standing by one
of the horses. The horse lifted his head from grazing; then dropped it impatiently. Pablo
was standing by the horse, leaning against him, moving with him as he swung with the
length of the picket rope and patting him on the neck. The horse was impatient at the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 36
tenderness while he was feeding. Robert Jordan could not see what Pablo was doing,
nor hear what he was saying to the horse, but he could see that he was neither
unpicketing nor saddling. He sat watching him, trying to think his problem out clearly.
“Thou my big good little pony,” Pablo was saying to the horse in the dark; it was the
big bay stallion he was speaking to. “Thou lovely white-faced big beauty. Thou with the
big neck arching like the viaduct of my pueblo,” he stopped. “But arching more and
much finer.” The horse was snatching grass, swinging his head sideways as he pulled,
annoyed by the man and his talking. “Thou art no woman nor a fool,” Pablo told the bay
horse. “Thou, oh, thou, thee, thee, my big little pony. Thou art no woman like a rock that
is burning. Thou art no colt of a girl with cropped head and the movement of a foal still
wet from its mother. Thou dost not insult nor lie nor not understand. Thou, oh, thee, oh
my good big little pony.”
It would have been very interesting for Robert Jordan to have heard Pablo speaking to
the bay horse but he did not hear him because now, convinced that Pablo was only
down checking on his horses, and having decided that it was not a practical move to kill
him at this time, he stood up and walked back to the cave. Pablo stayed in the meadow
talking to the horse for a long time. The horse understood nothing that he said; only,
from the tone of the voice, that they were endearments and he had been in the corral all
day and was hungry now, grazing impatiently at the limits of his picket rope, and the
man annoyed him. Pablo shifted the picket pin finally and stood by the horse, not talking
now. The horse went on grazing and was relieved now that the man did not bother him.
6
Inside the cave, Robert Jordan sat on one of the rawhide stools in a corner by the fire
listening to the woman. She was washing the dishes and the girl, Maria, was drying
them and putting them away, kneeling to place them in the hollow dug in the wall that
was used as a shelf.
“It is strange,” she said. “That El Sordo has not come. He should have been here an
hour ago.”
“Did you advise him to come?”
“No. He comes each night.”
“Perhaps he is doing something. Some work.”
“It is possible,” she said. “If he does not come we must go to see him tomorrow.”
“Yes. Is it far from here?”
“No. It will be a good trip. I lack exercise.”
“Can I go?” Maria asked. “May I go too, Pilar?”
“Yes, beautiful,” the woman said, then turning her big face, “Isn’t she pretty?” she
asked Robert Jordan. “How does she seem to thee? A little thin?”
“To me she seems very well,” Robert Jordan said. Maria filled his cup with wine. “Drink
that,” she said. “It will make me seem even better. It is necessary to drink much of that
for me to seem beautiful.”
“Then I had better stop,” Robert Jordan said. “Already thou seemest beautiful and
more.”
“That’s the way to talk,” the woman said. “You talk like the good ones. What more
does she seem?”
“Intelligent,” Robert Jordan said lamely. Maria giggled and the woman shook her head
sadly. “How well you begin and how it ends, Don Roberto.”
“Don’t call me Don Roberto.”
“It is a joke. Here we say Don Pablo for a joke. As we say the Señorita Maria for a
joke.”
“I don’t joke that way,” Robert Jordan said. “Camarada to me is what all should be
called with seriousness in this war. In the joking commences a rottenness.”
“Thou art very religious about thy politics,” the woman teased him. “Thou makest no
jokes?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 37
“Yes. I care much for jokes but not in the form of address. It is like a flag.”
“I could make jokes about a flag. Any flag,” the woman laughed. “To me no one can
joke of anything. The old flag of yellow and gold we called pus and blood. The flag of the
Republic with the purple added we call blood, pus and permanganate. It is a joke.”
“He is a Communist,” Maria said. “They are very serious gente.”
“Are you a Communist?”
“No I am an anti-fascist.”
“For a long time?”
“Since I have understood fascism.”
“How long is that?”
“For nearly ten years.”
“That is not much time,” the woman said. “I have been a Republican for twenty years.”
“My father was a Republican all his life,” Maria said. “It was for that they shot him.”
“My father was also a Republican all his life. Also my grandfather,” Robert Jordan
said.
“In what country?”
“The United States.”
“Did they shoot them?” the woman asked.
“Qué va,” Maria said. “The United States is a country of Republicans. They don’t shoot
you for being a Republican there.”
“All the same it is a good thing to have a grandfather who was a Republican,” the
woman said. “It shows a good blood.”
“My grandfather was on the Republican national committee,” Robert Jordan said. That
impressed even Maria.
“And is thy father still active in the Republic?” Pilar asked.
“No. He is dead.”
“Can one ask how he died?”
“He shot himself.”
“To avoid being tortured?” the woman asked.
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “To avoid being tortured.”
Maria looked at him with tears in her eyes. “My father,” she said, “could not obtain a
weapon. Oh, I am very glad that your father had the good fortune to obtain a weapon.”
“Yes. It was pretty lucky,” Robert Jordan said. “Should we talk about something else?”
“Then you and me we are the same,” Maria said. She put her hand on his arm and
looked in his face. He looked at her brown face and at the eyes that, since he had seen
them, had never been as young as the rest of her face but that now were suddenly
hungry and young and wanting.
“You could be brother and sister by the look,” the woman said. “But I believe it is
fortunate that you are not.”
“Now I know why I have felt as I have,” Maria said. “Now it is clear.”
“Qué va,” Robert Jordan said and reaching over, he ran his hand over the top of her
head. He had been wanting to do that all day and now he did it, he could feel his throat
swelling. She moved her head under his hand and smiled up at him and he felt the thick
but silky roughness of the cropped head rippling between his fingers. Then his hand was
on her neck and then he dropped it.
“Do it again,” she said. “I wanted you to do that all day.”
“Later,” Robert Jordan said and his voice was thick.
“And me,” the woman of Pablo said in her booming voice. “I am expected to watch all
this? I am expected not to be moved? One cannot. For fault of anything better; that
Pablo should come back.”
Maria took no notice of her now, nor of the others playing cards at the table by the
candlelight.
“Do you want another cup of wine, Roberto?” she asked.
“Yes,” he said. “Why not?”
“You’re going to have a drunkard like I have,” the woman of Pablo said. “With that rare“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 38
thing he drank in the cup and all. Listen to me, Inglés.”
“Not Inglés. American.”
“Listen, then, American. Where do you plan to sleep?”
“Outside. I have a sleeping robe.”
“Good,” she said. “The night is clear?”
“And will be cold.”
“Outside then,” she said. “Sleep thee outside. And thy materials can sleep with me.”
“Good,” said Robert Jordan.
“Leave us for a moment,” Robert Jordan said to the girl and put his hand on her
shoulder.
“Why?”
“I wish to speak to Pilar.”
“Must I go?”
“Yes.”
“What is it?” the woman of Pablo said when the girl had gone over to the mouth of the
cave where she stood by the big wineskin, watching the card players.
“The gypsy said I should have—” he began.
“No,” the woman interrupted. “He is mistaken.”
“If it is necessary that I—” Robert Jordan said quietly but with difficulty.
“Thee would have done it, I believe,” the woman said. “Nay, it is not necessary. I was
watching thee. But thy judgment was good.”
“But if it is needful—”
“No,” the woman said. “I tell you it is not needful. The mind of the gypsy is corrupt.”
“But in weakness a man can be a great danger.”
“No. Thou dost not understand. Out of this one has passed all capacity for danger.”
“I do not understand.”
“Thou art very young still,” she said. “You will understand.” Then, to the girl, “Come,
Maria. We are not talking more.”
The girl came over and Robert Jordan reached his hand out and patted her head. She
stroked under his hand like a kitten. Then he thought that she was going to cry. But her
lips drew up again and she looked at him and smiled.
“Thee would do well to go to bed now,” the woman said to Robert Jordan. “Thou hast
had a long journey.”
“Good,” said Robert Jordan. “I will get my things.”
7
He was asleep in the robe and he had been asleep, he thought, for a long time. The
robe was spread on the forest floor in the lee of the rocks beyond the cave mouth and
as he slept, he turned, and turning rolled on his pistol which was fastened by a lanyard
to one wrist and had been by his side under the cover when he went to sleep, shoulder
and back weary, leg-tired, his muscles pulled with tiredness so that the ground was soft,
and simply stretching in the robe against the flannel lining was voluptuous with fatigue.
Waking, he wondered where he was, knew, and then shifted the pistol from under his
side and settled happily to stretch back into sleep, his hand on the pillow of his clothing
that was bundled neatly around his rope-soled shoes. He had one arm around the
pillow.
Then he felt her hand on his shoulder and turned quickly, his right hand holding the
pistol under the robe.
“Oh, it is thee,” he said and dropping the pistol he reached both arms up and pulled
her down. With his arms around her he could feel her shivering.
“Get in,” he said softly. “It is cold out there.”
“No. I must not.”
“Get in,” he said. “And we can talk about it later.”
She was trembling and he held her wrist now with one hand and held her lightly with“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 39
the other arm. She had turned her head away.
“Get in, little rabbit,” he said and kissed her on the back of the neck.
“I am afraid.”
“No. Do not be afraid. Get in.”
“How?”
“Just slip in. There is much room. Do you want me to help you?”
“No,” she said and then she was in the robe and he was holding her tight to him and
trying to kiss her lips and she was pressing her face against the pillow of clothing but
holding her arms close around his neck. Then he felt her arms relax and she was
shivering again as he held her.
“No,” he said and laughed. “Do not be afraid. That is the pistol.”
He lifted it and slipped it behind him.
“I am ashamed,” she said, her face away from him.
“No. You must not be. Here. Now.”
“No, I must not. I am ashamed and frightened.”
“No. My rabbit. Please.”
“I must not. If thou dost not love me.”
“I love thee.”
“I love thee. Oh, I love thee. Put thy hand on my head,” she said away from him, her
face still in the pillow. He put his hand on her head and stroked it and then suddenly her
face was away from the pillow and she was in his arms, pressed close against him, and
her face was against his and she was crying.
He held her still and close, feeling the long length of the young body, and he stroked
her head and kissed the wet saltiness of her eyes, and as she cried he could feel the
rounded, firm-pointed breasts touching through the shirt she wore.
“I cannot kiss,” she said. “I do not know how.”
“There is no need to kiss.”
“Yes. I must kiss. I must do everything.”
“There is no need to do anything. We are all right. But thou hast many clothes.”
“What should I do?”
“I will help you.”
“Is that better?”
“Yes. Much. It is not better to thee?”
“Yes. Much better. And I can go with thee as Pilar said?”
“Yes.”
“But not to a home. With thee.”
“No, to a home.”
“No. No. No. With thee and I will be thy woman.”
Now as they lay all that before had been shielded was unshielded. Where there had
been roughness of fabric all was smooth with a smoothness and firm rounded pressing
and a long warm coolness, cool outside and warm within, long and light and closely
holding, closely held, lonely, hollow-making with contours, happymaking, young and
loving and now all warmly smooth with a hollowing, chest-aching, tight-held loneliness
that was such that Robert Jordan felt he could not stand it and he said, “Hast thou loved
others?”
“Never.”
Then suddenly, going dead in his arms, “But things were done to me.”
“By whom?”
“By various.”
Now she lay perfectly quietly and as though her body were dead and turned her head
away from him.
“Now you will not love me.”
“I love you,” he said.
But something had happened to him and she knew it.
“No,” she said and her voice had gone dead and flat. “Thou wilt not love me. But“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 40
perhaps thou wilt take me to the home. And I will go to the home and I will never be thy
woman nor anything.”
“I love thee, Maria.”
“No. It is not true,” she said. Then as a last thing pitifully and hopefully.
“But I have never kissed any man.”
“Then kiss me now.”
“I wanted to,” she said. “But I know not how. Where things were done to me I fought
until I could not see. I fought until— until—until one sat upon my head—and I bit him—
and then they tied my mouth and held my arms behind my head—and others did things
to me.”
“I love thee, Maria,” he said. “And no one has done anything to thee. Thee, they
cannot touch. No one has touched thee, little rabbit.”
“You believe that?”
“I know it.”
“And you can love me?” warm again against him now.
“I can love thee more.”
“I will try to kiss thee very well.”
“Kiss me a little.”
“I do not know how.”
“Just kiss me.”
She kissed him on the cheek.
“No.”
“Where do the noses go? I always wondered where the noses would go.”
“Look, turn thy head,” and then their mouths were tight together and she lay close
pressed against him and her mouth opened a little gradually and then, suddenly, holding
her against him, he was happier than he had ever been, lightly, lovingly, exultingly,
innerly happy and unthinking and untired and unworried and only feeling a great delight
and he said, “My little rabbit. My darling. My sweet. My long lovely.”
“What do you say?” she said as though from a great distance away.
“My lovely one,” he said.
They lay there and he felt her heart beating against his and with the side of his foot he
stroked very lightly against the side of hers.
“Thee came barefooted,” he said.
“Yes.”
“Then thee knew thou wert coming to the bed.”
“Yes.”
“And you had no fear.”
“Yes. Much. But more fear of how it would be to take my shoes off.”
“And what time is it now? lo sabes?”
“No. Thou hast no watch?”
“Yes. But it is behind thy back.”
“Take it from there.”
“No.”
“Then look over my shoulder.”
It was one o’clock. The dial showed bright in the darkness that the robe made.
“Thy chin scratches my shoulder.”
“Pardon it. I have no tools to shave.”
“I like it. Is thy beard blond?”
“Yes.”
“And will it be long?”
“Not before the bridge. Maria, listen. Dost thou—?”
“Do I what?”
“Dost thou wish?”
“Yes. Everything. Please. And if we do everything together, the other maybe never will
have been.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 41
“Did you think of that?”
“No. I think it in myself but Pilar told me.”
“She is very wise.”
“And another thing,” Maria said softly. “She said for me to tell you that I am not sick.
She knows about such things and she said to tell you that.”
“She told you to tell me?”
“Yes. I spoke to her and told her that I love you. I loved you when I saw you today and
I loved you always but I never saw you before and I told Pilar and she said if I ever told
you anything about anything, to tell you that I was not sick. The other thing she told me
long ago. Soon after the train.”
“What did she say?”
“She said that nothing is done to oneself that one does not accept and that if I loved
some one it would take it all away. I wished to die, you see.”
“What she said is true.”
“And now I am happy that I did not die. I am so happy that I did not die. And you can
love me?”
“Yes. I love you now.”
“And I can be thy woman?”
“I cannot have a woman doing what I ao. But thou art my woman now.”
“If once I am, then I will keep on. Am I thy woman now?”
“Yes, Maria. Yes, my little rabbit.”
She held herself tight to him and her lips looked for his and then found them and were
against them and he felt her, fresh, new and smooth and young and lovely with the
warm, scalding coolness and unbelievable to be there in the robe that was as familiar as
his clothes, or his shoes, or his duty and then she said, frightenedly, “And now let us do
quickly what it is we do so that the other is all gone.”
“You want?”
“Yes,” she said almost fiercely. “Yes. Yes. Yes.”
8
It was cold in the night and Robert Jordan slept heavily. Once he woke and,
stretching, realized that the girl was there, curled far down in the robe, breathing lightly
and regularly, and in the dark, bringing his head in from the cold, the sky hard and sharp
with stars, the air cold in his nostrils, he put his head under the warmth of the robe and
kissed her smooth shoulder. She did not wake and he rolled onto his side away from her
and with his head out of the robe in the cold again, lay awake a moment feeling the
long, seeping luxury of his fatigue and then the smooth tactile happiness of their two
bodies touching and then, as he pushed his legs out deep as they would go in the robe,
he slipped down steeply into sleep.
He woke at first daylight and the girl was gone. He knew it as he woke and, putting out
his arm, he felt the robe warm where she had been. He looked at the mouth of the cave
where the blanket showed frost-rimmed and saw the thin gray smoke from the crack in
the rocks that meant the kitchen fire was lighted.
A man came out of the timber, a blanket worn over his head like a poncho Robert
Jordan saw it was Pablo and that he was smoking a cigarette. He’s been down
corralling the horses, he thought.
Pablo pulled open the blanket and went into the cave without looking toward Robert
Jordan.
Robert Jordan felt with his hand the light frost that lay on the worn, spotted green
balloon silk outer covering of the five-year-old down robe, then settled into it again.
Bueno, he said to himself, feeling the familiar caress of the flannel lining as he spread
his legs wide, then drew them together and then turned on his side so that his head
would be away from the direction where he knew the sun would come. Qué más da, I
might as well sleep some more.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 42
He slept until the sound of airplane motors woke him.
Lying on his back, he saw them, a fascist patrol of three Fiats, tiny, bright, fast-moving
across the mountain sky, headed in the direction from which Anselmo and he had come
yesterday. The three passed and then came nine more, flying much higher in the
minute, pointed formations of threes, threes and threes.
Pablo and the gypsy were standing at the cave mouth, in the shadow, watching the
sky and as Robert Jordan lay still, the sky now full of the high hammering roar of motors,
there was a new droning roar and three more planes came over at less than a thousand
feet above the clearing. These three were Heinkel one-elevens, twin-motor bombers.
Robert Jordan, his head in the shadow of the rocks, knew they would not see him, and
that it did not matter if they did. He knew they could possibly see the horses in the corral
if they were looking for anything in these mountains. If they were not looking for anything
they might still see them but would naturally take them for some of their own cavalry
mounts. Then came a new and louder droning roar and three more Heinkel one-elevens
showed coming steeply, stiffly, lower yet, crossing in rigid formation, their pounding roar
approaching in crescendo to an absolute of noise and then receding as they passed the
clearing.
Robert Jordan unrolled the bundle of clothing that made his pillow and pulled on his
shirt. It was over his head and he was pulling it down when he heard the next planes
coming and he pulled his trousers on under the robe and lay still as three more of the
Heinkel bimotor bombers came over. Before they were gone over the shoulder of the
mountain, he had buckled on his pistol, rolled the robe and placed it against the rocks
and sat now, close against the rocks, tying his rope-soled shoes when the approaching
droning turned to a greater clattering roar than ever before and nine more Heinkel light
bombers came in echelons; hammering the sky apart as they went over.
Robert Jordan slipped along the rocks to the mouth of the cave where one of the
brothers, Pablo, the gypsy, Anselmo, Agustín and the woman stood in the mouth looking
out.
“Have there been planes like this before?” he asked.
“Never,” said Pablo. “Get in. They will see thee.”
The sun had not yet hit the mouth of the cave. It was just now shining on the meadow
by the stream and Robert Jordan knew they could not be seen in the dark, early
morning shadow of the trees and the solid shade the rocks made, but he went in the
cave in order not to make them nervous.
“They are many,” the woman said.
“And there will be more,” Robert Jordan said.
“How do you know?” Pablo asked suspiciously.
“Those, just now, will have pursuit planes with them.”
Just then they heard them, the higher, whining drone, and as they passed at about
five thousand feet, Robert Jordan counted fifteen Fiats in echelon of echelons like a
wild-goose flight of the V-shaped threes.
In the cave entrance their faces all looked very sober and Robert Jordan said, “You
have not seen this many planes?”
“Never,” said Pablo.
“There are not many at Segovia?”
“Never has there been, we have seen three usually. Sometimes six of the chasers.
Perhaps three Junkers, the big ones with the three motors, with the chasers with them.
Never have we seen planes like this.”
It is bad, Robert Jordan thought. This is really bad. Here is a concentration of planes
which means something very bad. I must listen for them to unload. But no, they cannot
have brought up the troops yet for the attack. Certainly not before tonight or tomorrow
night, certainly not yet. Certainly they will not be moving anything at this hour.
He could still hear the receding drone. He looked at his watch. By now they should be
over the lines, the first ones anyway. He Pushed the knob that set the second hand to
clicking and watched it move around. No, perhaps not yet. By now. Yes. Well over by“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 43
now. Two hundred and fifty miles an hour for those one-elevens anyway. Five minutes
would carry them there. By now they’re well beyond the pass with Castile all yellow and
tawny beneath them now in the morning, the yellow crossed by white roads and spotted
with the small villages and the shadows of the Heinkels moving over the land as the
shadows of sharks pass over a sandy floor of the ocean.
There was no bump, bump, bumping thud of bombs. His watch ticked on.
They’re going on to Colmenar, to Escorial, or to the flying field at Manzanares el Real,
he thought, with the old castle above the lake with the ducks in the reeds and the fake
airfield just behind the real field with the dummy planes, not quite hidden, their props
turning in the wind. That’s where they must be headed. They can’t know about the
attack, he told himself and something in him said, why can’t they? They’ve known about
all the others.
“Do you think they saw the horses?” Pablo asked.
“Those weren’t looking for horses,” Robert Jordan said.
“But did they see them?”
“Not unless they were asked to look for them.”
“Could they see them?”
“Probably not,” Robert Jordan said. “Unless the sun were on the trees.”
“It is on them very early,” Pablo said miserably.
“I think they have other things to think of besides thy horses,” Robert Jordan said.
It was eight minutes since he had pushed the lever on the stop watch and there was
still no sound of bombing.
“What do you do with the watch?” the woman asked.
“I listen where they have gone.”
“Oh,” she said. At ten minutes he stopped looking at the watch knowing it would be too
far away to hear, now, even allowing a minute for the sound to travel, and said to
Anselmo, “I would speak to thee.”
Anselmo came out of the cave mouth and they walked a little way from the entrance
and stood beside a pine tree.
“Qué tal?” Robert Jordan asked him. “How goes it?”
“All right.”
“Hast thou eaten?”
“No. No one has eaten.”
“Eat then and take something to eat at mid-day. I want you to go to watch the road.
Make a note of everything that passes both up and down the road.”
“I do not write.”
“There is no need to,” Robert Jordan took out two leaves from his notebook and with
his knife cut an inch from the end of his pencil. “Take this and make a mark for tanks
thus,” he drew a slanted tank, “and then a mark for each one and when there are four,
cross the four strokes for the fifth.”
“In this way we count also.”
“Good. Make another mark, two wheels and a box, for trucks. If they are empty make
a circle. If they are full of troops make a straight mark. Mark for guns. Big ones, thus.
Small ones, thus. Mark for cars. Mark for ambulances. Thus, two wheels and a box with
a cross on it. Mark for troops on foot by companies, like this, see? A little square and
then mark beside it. Mark for cavalry, like this, you see? Like a horse. A box with four
legs. That is a troop of twenty horse. You understand? Each troop a mark.”
“Yes. It is ingenious.”
“Now,” he drew two large wheels with circles around them and a short line for a gun
barrel. “These are anti-tanks. They have rubber tires. Mark for them. These are anti-
aircraft,” two wheels with the gun barrel slanted up. “Mark for them also. Do you
understand? Have you seen such guns?”
“Yes,” Anselmo said. “Of course. It is clear.”
“Take the gypsy with you that he will know from what point you will be watching so you
may be relieved. Pick a place that is safe, not too close and from where you can see“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 44
well and comfortably. Stay until you are relieved.”
“I understand.”
“Good. And that when you come back, I should know everything that moved upon the
road. One paper is for movement up. One is for movement down the road.”
They walked over toward the cave.
“Send Rafael to me,” Robert Jordan said and waited by the tree. He watched Anselmo
go into the cave, the blanket falling behind him. The gypsy sauntered out, wiping his
mouth with his hand.
“Qué tal?” the gypsy said. “Did you divert yourself last night?”
“I slept.”
“Less bad,” the gypsy said and grinned. “Have you a cigarette?”
“Listen,” Robert Jordan said and felt in his pocket for the cigarettes. “I wish you to go
with Anselmo to a place from which he will observe the road. There you will leave him,
noting the place in order that you may guide me to it or guide whoever will relieve him
later. You will then go to where you can observe the saw mill and note if there are any
changes in the post there.”
“What changes?”
“How many men are there now?”
“Eight. The last I knew.”
“See how many are there now. See at what intervals the guard is relieved at that
bridge.”
“Intervals?”
“How many hours the guard stays on and at what time a change is made.”
“I have no watch.”
“Take mine.” He unstrapped it.
“What a watch,” Rafael said admiringly. “Look at what complications. Such a watch
should be able to read and write. Look at what complications of numbers. It’s a watch to
end watches.”
“Don’t fool with it,” Robert Jordan said. “Can you tell time?”
“Why not? Twelve o’clock mid-day. Hunger. Twelve o’clock midnight. Sleep. Six
o’clock in the morning, hunger. Six o’clock at night, drunk. With luck. Ten o’clock at
night—”
“Shut up,” Robert Jordan said. “You don’t need to be a clown. I want you to check on
the guard at the big bridge and the post on the road below in the same manner as the
post and the guard at the saw mill and the small bridge.”
“It is much work,” the gypsy smiled. “You are sure there is no one you would rather
send than me?”
“No, Rafael. It is very important. That you should do it very carefully and keeping out
of sight with care.”
“I believe I will keep out of sight,” the gypsy said. “Why do you tell me to keep out of
sight? You think I want to be shot?”
“Take things a little seriously,” Robert Jordan said. “This is serious.”
“Thou askest me to take things seriously? After what thou didst last night? When thou
needest to kill a man and instead did what you did? You were supposed to kill one, not
make one! When we have just seen the sky full of airplanes of a quantity to kill us back
to our grandfathers and forward to all unborn grandsons including all cats, goats and
bedbugs. Airplanes making a noise to curdle the milk in your mother’s breasts as they
pass over darkening the sky and roaring like lions and you ask me to take things
seriously. I take them too seriously already.”
“All right,” said Robert Jordan and laughed and put his hand on the gypsy’s shoulder.
“Don’t take them too seriously then. Now finish your breakfast and go.”
“And thou?” the gypsy asked. “What do you do?”
“I go to see El Sordo.”
“After those airplanes it is very possible that thou wilt find nobody in the whole
mountains,” the gypsy said. “There must have been many people sweating the big drop“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 45
this morning when those passed.”
“Those have other work than hunting guerillas.”
“Yes,” the gypsy said. Then shook his head. “But when they care to undertake that
work.”
“Qué va,” Robert Jordan said. “Those are the best of the German light bombers. They
do not send those after gypsies.”
“They give me a horror,” Rafael said. “Of such things, yes, I am frightened.”
“They go to bomb an airfield,” Robert Jordan told him as they went into the cave. “I am
almost sure they go for that.”
“What do you say?” the woman of Pablo asked. She poured him a bowl of coffee and
handed him a can of condensed milk.
“There is milk? What luxury!”
“There is everything,” she said. “And since the planes there is much fear. Where did
you say they went?”
Robert Jordan dripped some of the thick milk into his coffee from the slit cut in the can,
wiped the can on the rim of the cup, and stirred the coffee until it was light brown.
“They go to bomb an airfield I believe. They might go to Escorial and Colmenar.
Perhaps a!! three.”
“That they should go a long way and keep away from here,” Pablo said.
“And why are they here now?” the woman asked. “What brings them now? Never have
we seen such planes. Nor in such quantity. Do they prepare an attack?”
“What movement was there on the road last night?” Robert Jordan asked. The girl
Maria was close to him but he did not look at her.
“You,” the woman said. “Fernando. You were in La Granja last night. What movement
was there?”
“Nothing,” a short, open-faced man of about thirty-five with a cast in one eye, whom
Robert Jordan had not seen before, answered. “A few camions as usual. Some cars. No
movement of troops while I was there.”
“You go into La Granja every night?” Robert Jordan asked him.
“I or another,” Fernando said. “Some one goes.”
“They go for the news. For tobacco. For small things,” the woman said.
“We have people there?”
“Yes. Why not? Those who work the power plant. Some others.”
“What was the news?”
“Pues nada. There was nothing. It still goes badly in the north. That is not news. In the
north it has gone badly now since the beginning.”
“Did you hear anything from Segovia?”
“No, hombre. I did not ask.”
“Do you go into Segovia?”
“Sometimes,” Fernando said. “But there is danger. There are controls where they ask
for your papers.”
“Do you know the airfield?”
“No, hombre. I know where it is but I was never close to it. There, there is much asking
for papers.”
“No one spoke about these planes last night?”
“In La Gnanja? Nobody. But they will talk about them tonight certainly. They talked
about the broadcast of Quiepo de Llano. Nothing more. Oh, yes. It seems that the
Republic is preparing an offensive.”
“That what?”
“That the Republic is preparing an offensive.”
“Where?”
“It is not certain. Perhaps here. Perhaps for another pant of the Sierra. Hast thou
heard of it?”
“They say this in La Granja?”
“Yes, hombre. I had forgotten it. But there is a!ways much talk of offensives.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 46
“Where does this talk come from?”
“Where? Why from different people. The officers speak in the cafés in Segovia and
Avila and the waiters note it. The rumors come running. Since some time they speak of
an offensive by the Republic in these parts.”
“By the Republic or by the Fascists?”
“By the Republic. If it were by the Fascists all would know of it. No, this is an offensive
of quite some size. Some say there are two. One here and the other over the Alto del
Leon near the Escorial. Have you heard aught of this?”
“What else did you hear?”
“Nada, hombre. Nothing. Oh, yes. There was some talk that the Republicans would try
to blow up the bridges, if there was to be an offensive. But the bridges are guarded.”
“Art thou joking?” Robert Jordan said, sipping his coffee.
“No, hombre,” said Fernando.
“This one doesn’t joke,” the woman said. “Bad luck that he doesn’t.”
“Then,” said Robert Jordan. “Thank you for all the news. Did you hear nothing more?”
“No. They talk, as always, of troops to be sent to clear out these mountains. There is
some talk that they are on the way. That they Rave been sent already from Valladolid.
But they always talk in that Way. It is not to give any importance to.”
“And thou,” the woman of Pablo said to Pablo almost viciously. “With thy talk of
safety.”
Pablo looked at her reflectively and scratched his chin. “Thou,” he said. “And thy
bridges.”
“What bridges?” asked Fernando cheerfully.
“Stupid,” the woman said to him. “Thick head. Tonto. Take another cup of coffee and
try to remember more news.”
“Don’t be angry, Pilar,” Fernando said calmly and cheerfully. “Neither should one
become alarmed at rumors. I have told thee and this comrade all that I remember.”
“You don’t remember anything more?” Robert Jordan asked.
“No,” Fernando said with dignity. “And I am fortunate to remember this because, since
it was but rumors, I paid no attention to any of it.”
“Then there may have been more?”
“Yes. It is possible. But I paid no attention. For a year I have heard nothing but
rumors.”
Robert Jordan heard a quick, control-breaking sniff of laughter from the girl, Maria,
who was standing behind him.
“Tell us one more rumor, Fernandito,” she said and then her shoulders shook again.
“If I could remember, I would not,” Fernando said. “It is beneath a man’s dignity to
listen and give importance to rumors.”
“And with this we will save the Republic,” the woman said.
“No. You will save it by blowing bridges,” Pablo told her.
“Go,” said Robert Jordan to Anselmo and Rafael. “If you have eaten.”
“We go now,” the old man said and the two of them stood up. Robert Jordan felt a
hand on his shoulder. It was Maria. “Thou shouldst eat,” she said and let her hand rest
there. “Eat well so that thy stomach can support more rumors.”
“The rumors have taken the place of the appetite.”
“No. It should not be so. Eat this now before more rumors come.” She put the bowl
before him.
“Do not make a joke of me,” Fernando said to her. “I am thy good friend, Maria.”
“I do not joke at thee, Fernando. I only joke with him and he should eat or he will be
hungry.”
“We should all eat,” Fernando said. “Pilar, what passes that we are not served?”
“Nothing, man,” the woman of Pablo said and filled his bowl with the meat stew. “Eat.
Yes, that’s what you can do. Eat now.”
“It is very good, Pilar,” Fernando said, all dignity intact.
“Thank you,” said the woman. “Thank you and thank you again.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 47
“Are you angry at me?” Fernando asked.
“No. Eat. Go ahead and eat.”
“I will,” said Fernando. “Thank you.”
Robert Jordan looked at Maria and her shoulders started shaking again and she
looked away. Fernando ate steadily, a proud and dignified expression on his face, the
dignity of which could not be affected even by the huge spoon that he was using or the
slight dripping of juice from the stew which ran from the corners of his mouth.
“Do you like the food?” the woman of Pablo asked him.
“Yes, Pilar,” he said with his mouth full. “It is the same as usual.”
Robert Jordan felt Maria’s hand on his arm and felt her fingers tighten with delight.
“It is for that that you like it?” the woman asked Fernando.
“Yes,” she said. “I see. The stew; as usual. Como siempre. Things are bad in the
north; as usual. An offensive here; as usual. That troops come to hunt us out; as usual.
You could serve as a monument to as usual.”
“But the last two are only rumors, Pilar.”
“Spain,” the woman of Pablo said bitterly. Then turned to Robert Jordan. “Do they
have people such as this in other countries?”
“There are no other countries like Spain,” Robert Jordan said politely.
“You are right,” Fernando said. “There is no other country in the world like Spain.”
“Hast thou ever seen any other country?” the woman asked him.
“Nay,” said Fernando. “Nor do I wish to.”
“You see?” the woman of Pablo said to Robert Jordan.
“Fernandito,” Maria said to him. “Tell us of the time thee went to Valencia”
“I did not like Valencia.”
“Why?” Maria asked and pressed Robert Jordan’s arm again. “Why did thee not like
it?”
“The people had no manners and I could not understand them. All they did was shout
ché at one another.”
“Could they understand thee?” Maria asked.
“They pretended not to,” Fernando said.
“And what did thee there?”
“I left without even seeing the sea,” Fernando said. “I did not like the people.”
“Oh, get out of here, you old maid,” the woman of Pablo said. “Get out of here before
you make me sick. In Valencia I had the best time of my life. Vamos! Valencia. Don’t talk
to me of Valencia.”
“What did thee there?” Maria asked. The woman of Pablo sat down at the table with a
bowl of coffee, a piece of bread and a bowl of the stew.
“Qué? what did we there. I was there when Finito had a contract for three fights at the
Feria. Never have I seen so many people. Never have I seen cafés so crowded. For
hours it would be impossible to get a seat and it was impossible to board the tram cars.
In Valencia there was movement all day and all night.”
“But what did you do?” Maria asked.
“All things,” the woman said. “We went to the beach and lay in the water and boats
with sails were hauled up out of the sea by oxen. The oxen driven to the water until they
must swim; then harnessed to the boats, and, when they found their feet, staggering up
the sand. Ten yokes of oxen dragging a boat with sails out of the sea in the morning
with the line of the small waves breaking on the beach. That is Valencia.”
“But what did thee besides watch oxen?”
“We ate in pavilions on the sand. Pastries made of cooked and shredded fish and red
and green peppers and small nuts like grains of rice. Pastries delicate and flaky and the
fish of a richness that was incredible. Prawns fresh from the sea sprinkled with lime
juice. They were pink and sweet and there were four bites to a prawn. Of those we ate
many. Then we ate paella with fresh sea food, clams in their shells, mussels, crayfish,
and small eels. Then we ate even smaller eels alone cooked in oil and as tiny as bean
sprouts and curled in all directions and so tender they disappeared in the mouth without“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 48
chewing. All the time drinking a white wine, cold, light and good at thirty centimos the
bottle. And for an end, melon. That is the home of the melon.”
“The melon of Castile is better,” Fernando said.
“Qué va,” said the woman of Pablo. “The melon of Castile is for self abuse. The melon
of Valencia for eating. When I think of those melons long as one’s arm, green like the
sea and crisp and juicy to cut and sweeter than the early morning in summer. Aye, when
I think of those smallest eels, tiny, delicate and in mounds on the plate. Also the beer in
pitchers all through the afternoon, the beer sweating in its coldness in pitchers the size
of water jugs.”
“And what did thee when not eating nor drinking?”
“We made love in the room with the strip wood blinds hanging over the balcony and a
breeze through the opening of the top of the door which turned on hinges. We made
love there, the room dark in the day time from the hanging blinds, and from the streets
there was the scent of the flower market and the smell of burned powder from the
firecrackers of the traca that ran though the streets exploding each noon during the
Feria. It was a line of fireworks that ran through all the city, the firecrackers linked
together and the explosions running along on poles and wires of the tramways,
exploding with great noise and a jumping from pole to pole with a sharpness and a
cracking of explosion you could not believe.
“We made love and then sent for another pitcher of beer with the drops of its coldness
on the glass and when the girl brought it, I took it from the door and I placed the
coldness of the pitcher against the back of Finito as he lay, now, asleep, not having
wakened when the beer was brought, and he said, ‘No, Pilar. No, woman, let me sleep.’
And I said, ‘No, wake up and drink this to see how cold,’ and he drank without opening
his eyes and went to sleep again and I lay with my back against a pillow at the foot of
the bed and watched him sleep, brown and dark-haired and young and quiet in his
sleep, and drank the whole pitcher, listening now to the music of a band that was
passing. You,” she said to Pablo. “Do you know aught of such things?”
“We have done things together,” Pablo said.
“Yes,” the woman said. “Why not? And thou wert more man than Finito in your time.
But never did we go to Valencia. Never did we lie in bed together and hear a band pass
in Valencia.”
“It was impossible,” Pablo told her. “We have had no opportunity to go to Valencia.
Thou knowest that if thou wilt be reasonable. But, with Finito, neither did thee blow up
any train.”
“No,” said the woman. “That is what is left to us. The train. Yes. Always the train. No
one can speak against that. That remains of all the laziness, sloth and failure. That
remains of the cowardice of this moment. There were many other things before too. I do
not want to be unjust. But no one can speak against Valencia either. You hear me?”
“I did not like it,” Fernando said quietly. “I did not like Valencia.”
“Yet they speak of the mule as stubborn,” the woman said. “Clean up, Maria, that we
may go.”
As she said this they heard the first sound of the planes returning.
9
They stood in the mouth of the cave and watched them. The bombers were high now
in fast, ugly arrow-heads beating the sky apart with the noise of their motors. They are
shaped like sharks, Robert Jordan thought, the wide-finned, sharp-nosed sharks of the
Gulf Stream. But these, wide-finned in silver, roaring, the light mist of their propellers in
the sun, these do not move like sharks. They move like no thing there has ever been.
They move like mechanized doom.
You ought to write, he told himself. Maybe you will again some time. He felt Maria
holding to his arm. She was looking up and he said to her, “What do they look like to
you, guapa?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 49
“I don’t know,” she said. “Death, I think.”
“They look like planes to me,” the woman of Pablo said. “‘Where are the little ones?”
“They may be crossing at another part,” Robert Jordan said. “Those bombers are too
fast to have to wait for them and have come back alone. We never follow them across
the lines to fight. There aren’t enough planes to risk it.”
Just then three Heinkel fighters in V formation came low over the clearing coming
toward them, just over the tree tops, like clattering, wing-tilting, pinch-nosed ugly toys, to
enlarge suddenly, fearfully to their actual size; pouring past in a whining roar. They were
so low that from the cave mouth all of them could see the pilots, helmeted, goggled, a
scarf blowing back from behind the patrol leader’s head.
“Those can see the horses,” Pablo said.
“Those can see thy cigarette butts,” the woman said. “Let fall the blanket.”
No more planes came over. The others must have crossed farther up the range and
when the droning was gone they went out of the cave into the open.
The sky was empty now and high and blue and clear.
“It seems as though they were a dream that you wake from,” Maria said to Robert
Jordan. There was not even the last almost unheard hum that comes like a finger faintly
touching and leaving and touching again after the sound is gone almost past hearing.
“They are no dream and you go in and clean up,” Pilar said to her. “What about it?”
she turned to Robert Jordan. “Should we ride or walk?”
Pablo looked at her and grunted.
“As you will,” Robert Jordan said.
“Then let us walk,” she said. “I would like it for the liver.”
“Riding is good for the liver.”
“Yes, but hard on the buttocks. We will walk and thou—” She turned to Pablo. “Go
down and count thy beasts and see they have not flown away with any.”
“Do you want a horse to ride?” Pablo asked Robert Jordan.
“No. Many thanks. What about the girl?”
“Better for her to walk,” Pilar said. “She’ll get stiff in too many places and serve for
nothing.”
Robert Jordan felt his face reddening.
“Did you sleep well?” Pilar asked. Then said, “It is true that there is no sickness. There
could have been. I know not why there wasn’t. There probably still is God after all,
although we have abolished Him. Go on,” she said to Pablo. “This does not concern
thee. This is of people younger than thee. Made of other material. Get on.” Then to
Robert Jordan, “Agustín is looking after thy things. We go when he comes.”
It was a clear, bright day and warm now in the sun. Robert Jordan looked at the big,
brown-faced woman with her kind, widely set eyes and her square, heavy face, lined
and pleasantly ugly, the eyes merry, but the face sad until the lips moved. He looked at
her and then at the man, heavy and stolid, moving off through the trees toward the
corral. The woman, too, was looking after him.
“Did you make love?” the woman said.
“What did she say?”
“She would not tell me.”
“I neither.”
“Then you made love,” the woman said. “Be as careful with her as you can.”
“What if she has a baby?”
“That will do no harm,” the woman said. “That will do less harm.”
“This is no place for that.”
“She will not stay here. She will go with you.”
“And where will I go? I can’t take a woman where I go.”
“Who knows? You may take two where you go.”
“That is no way to talk.”
“Listen,” the woman said. “I am no coward, but I see things very clearly in the early
morning and I think there are many that we know that are alive now who will never see“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 50
another Sunday.”
“In what day are we?”
“Sunday.”
“Qué va,” said Robert Jordan. “Another Sunday is very far. If we see Wednesday we
are all right. But I do not like to hear thee talk like this.”
“Every one needs to talk to some one,” the woman said. “Before we had religion and
other nonsense. Now for every one there should be some one to whom one can speak
frankly, for all the valor that one could have one becomes very alone.”
“We are not alone. We are all together.”
“The sight of those machines does things to one,” the woman said. “We are nothing
against such machines.”
“Yet we can beat them.”
“Look,” the woman said. “I confess a sadness to you, but do not think I lack resolution.
Nothing has happened to my resolution.”
“The sadness will dissipate as the sun rises. It is like a mist.”
“Clearly,” the woman said. “If you want it that way. Perhaps it came from talking that
foolishness about Valencia. And that failure of a man who has gone to look at his
horses. I wounded him much with the story. Kill him, yes. Curse him, yes. But wound
him, no.”
“How came you to be with him?”
“How is one with any one? In the first days of the movement and before too, he was
something. Something serious. But now he is finished. The plug has been drawn and
the wine has all run out of the skin.”
“I do not like him.”
“Nor does he like you, and with reason. Last night I slept with him.” She smiled now
and shook her head. “ Vamos a ver,” she said. “I said to him, ‘Pablo, why did you not kill
the foreigner?’
“‘He’s a good boy, Pilar,’ he said. ‘He’s a good boy.’
“So I said, ‘You understand now that I command?’
“‘Yes, Pilar. Yes,’ he said. Later in the night I hear him awake and he is crying. He is
crying in a short and ugly manner as a man cries when it is as though there is an animal
inside that is shaking him.
“‘What passes with thee, Pablo?’ I said to him and I took hold of him and held him.
“‘Nothing, Pilar. Nothing.’
“‘Yes. Something passes with thee.’
“‘The people,’ he said. ‘The way they left me. The gente.’
“‘Yes, but they are with me,’ I said, ‘and I am thy woman.’
“‘Pilar,’ he said, ‘remember the train.’ Then he said, ‘May God aid thee, Pilar.’
“‘What are you talking of God for?’ I said to him. ‘What way is that to speak?’
“‘Yes,’ he said. ‘God and the Virgen.’
“‘Qué va, God and the Virgen,’ I said to him. ‘Is that any way to talk?’
“‘I am afraid to die, Pilar,’ he said. ‘Tengo miedo de morir. Dost thou understand?’
“‘Then get out of bed,’ I said to him. ‘There is not room in one bed for me and thee and
thy fear all together.’
“Then he was ashamed and was quiet and I went to sleep but, man, he’s a ruin.”
Robert Jordan said nothing.
“All my life I have had this sadness at intervals,” the woman said. “But it is not like the
sadness of Pablo. It does not affect my resolution.”
“I believe that.”
“It may be it is like the times of a woman,” she said. “It may be it is nothing,” she
paused, then went on. “I put great illusion in the Republic. I believe firmly in the Republic
and I have faith. I believe in it with fervor as those who have religious faith believe in the
mysteries.”
“I believe you.”
“And you have this same faith?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 51
“In the Republic?”
“Yes.”
“Yes,” he said, hoping it was true.
“I am happy,” the woman said. “And you have no fear?”
“Not to die,” he said truly.
“But other fears?”
“Only of not doing my duty as I should.”
“Not of capture, as the other had?”
“No,” he said truly. “Fearing that, one would be so preoccupied as to be useless.”
“You are a very cold boy.”
“No,” he said. “I do not think so.”
“No. In the head you are very cold.”
“It is that I am very preoccupied with my work.”
“But you do not like the things of life?”
“Yes. Very much. But not to interfere with my work.”
“You like to drink, I know. I have seen.”
“Yes. Very much. But not to interfere with my work.”
“And women?”
“I like them very much, but I have not given them much importance.”
“You do not care for them?”
“Yes. But I have not found one that moved me as they say they should move you.”
“I think you lie.”
“Maybe a little.”
“But you care for Maria.”
“Yes. Suddenly and very much.”
“I, too. I care for her very much. Yes. Much.”
“I, too,” said Robert Jordan, and could feel his voice thickening. “I, too. Yes.” It gave
him pleasure to say it and he said it quite formally in Spanish. “I care for her very much.”
“I will leave you alone with her after we have seen El Sordo.”
Robert Jordan said nothing. Then he said, “That is not necessary.”
“Yes, man. It is necessary. There is not much time.”
“Did you see that in the hand?” he asked.
“No. Do not remember that nonsense of the hand.”
She had put that away with all the other things that might do ill to the Republic.
Robert Jordan said nothing. He was looking at Maria putting away the dishes inside
the cave. She wiped her hands and turned and smiled at him. She could not hear what
Pilar was saying, but as she smiled at Robert Jordan she blushed dark under the tawny
skin and then smiled at him again.
“There is the day also,” the woman said. “You have the night, but there is the day, too.
Clearly, there is no such luxury as in Valencia in my time. But you could pick a few wild
strawberries or something.” She laughed.
Robert Jordan put his arm on her big shoulder. “I care for thee, too,” he said. “I care
for thee very much.”
“Thou art a regular Don Juan Tenorio,” the woman said, embarrassed now with
affection. “There is a commencement of caring for every one. Here comes Agustín.”
Robert Jordan went into the cave and up to where Maria was standing. She watched
him come toward her, her eyes bright, the blush again on her cheeks and throat.
“Hello, little rabbit,” he said and kissed her on the mouth. She held him tight to her and
looked in his face and said, “Hello. Oh, hello. Hello.”
Fernando, still sitting at the table smoking a cigarette, stood up, shook his head and
walked out, picking up his carbine from where it leaned against the wall.
“It is very unformal,” he said to Pilar. “And I do not like it. You should take care of the
girl.”
“I am,” said Pilar. “That comrade is her novio.”
“Oh,” said Fernando. “In that case, since they are engaged, I encounter it to be“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 52
perfectly normal.”
“I am pleased,” the woman said.
“Equally,” Fernando agreed gravely. “Salud, Pilar.”
“Where are you going?”
“To the upper post to relieve Primitivo.”
“Where the hell are you going?” Agustín asked the grave little man as he came up.
“To my duty,” Fernando said with dignity.
“Thy duty,” said Agustín mockingly. “I besmirch the milk of thy duty.” Then turning to
the woman, “Where the un-nameable is this vileness that I am to guard?”
“In the cave,” Pilar said. “In two sacks. And I am tired of thy obscenity.”
“I obscenity in the milk of thy tiredness,” Agustín said.
“Then go and befoul thyself,” Pilar said to him without heat.
“Thy mother,” Agustín replied.
“Thou never had one,” Pilar told him, the insults having reached the ultimate formalism
in Spanish in which the acts are never stated but only implied.
“What are they doing in there?” Agustín now asked confidentially.
“Nothing,” Pilar told him. “Nada. We are, after all, in the spring, animal.”
“Animal,” said Agustín, relishing the word. “Animal. And thou. Daughter of the great
whore of whores. I befoul myself in the milk of the springtime.”
Pilar slapped him on the shoulder.
“You,” she said, and laughed that booming laugh. “You lack variety in your cursing.
But you have force. Did you see the planes?”
“I un-name in the milk of their motors,” Agustín said, nodding his head and biting his
lower lip.
“That’s something,” Pilar said. “That is really something. But really difficult of
execution.”
“At that altitude, yes,” Agustín grinned. “Desde luego. But it is better to joke.”
“Yes,” the woman of Pablo said. “It is much better to joke, and you are a good man
and you joke with force.”
“Listen, Pilar,” Agustín said seriously. “Something is preparing. It is not true?”
“How does it seem to you?”
“Of a foulness that cannot be worse. Those were many planes, woman. Many planes.”
“And thou hast caught fear from them like all the others?”
“Qué va,” said Agustín. “What do you think they are preparing?”
“Look,” Pilar said. “From this boy coming for the bridges obviously the Republic is
preparing an offensive. From these planes obviously the Fascists are preparing to meet
it. But why show the planes?”
“In this war are many foolish things,” Agustín said. “In this war there is an idiocy
without bounds.”
“Clearly,” said Pilar. “Otherwise we could not be here.”
“Yes,” said Agustín. “We swim within the idiocy for a year now. But Pablo is a man of
much understanding. Pablo is very wily.”
“Why do you say this?”
“I say it.”
“But you must understand,” Pilar explained. “It is now too late to be saved by wiliness
and he has lost the other.”
“I understand,” said Agustín. “I know we must go. And since we must win to survive
ultimately, it is necessary that the bridges must be blown. But Pablo, for the coward that
he now is, is very smart.”
“I, too, am smart.”
“No, Pilar,” Agustín said. “You are not smart. You are brave. You are loyal. You have
decision. You have intuition. Much decision and much heart. But you are not smart.”
“You believe that?” the woman asked thoughtfully.
“Yes, Pilar.”
“The boy is smart,” the woman said. “Smart and cold. Very cold in the head.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 53
“Yes,” Agustín said. “He must know his business or they would not have him doing
this. But I do not know that he is smart. Pablo I know is smart.”
“But rendered useless by his fear and his disinclination to action.”
“But still smart.”
“And what do you say?”
“Nothing. I try to consider it intelligently. In this moment we need to act with
intelligence. After the bridge we must leave at once. All must be prepared. We must
know for where we are leaving and how.”
“Naturally.”
“For this—Pablo. It must be done smartly.”
“I have no confidence in Pablo.”
“In this, yes.”
“No. You do not know how far he is ruined.”
“Pero es muy vivo. He is very smart. And if we do not do this smartly we are
obscenitied.”
“I will think about it,” Pilar said. “I have the day to think about it.”
“For the bridges; the boy,” Agustín said. “This he must know. Look at the fine manner
in which the other organized the train.”
“Yes,” Pilar said. “It was really he who planned all.”
“You for energy and resolution,” Agustín said. “But Pablo for the moving. Pablo for the
retreat. Force him now to study it.”
“You are a man of intelligence.”
“Intelligent, yes,” Agustín said. “But sin picardia. Pablo for that.”
“With his fear and all?”
“With his fear and all.”
“And what do you think of the bridges?”
“It is necessary. That I know. Two things we must do. We must leave here and we
must win. The bridges are necessary if we are to Win.”
“If Pablo is so smart, why does he not see that?”
“He wants things as they are for his own weakness. He wants tO stay in the eddy of
his own weakness. But the river is rising. Forced to a change, he will be smart in the
change. Es muy vivo.”
“It is good that the boy did not kill him.”
“Qué va. The gypsy wanted me to kill him last night. The gypsy is an animal.”
“You’re an animal, too,” she said. “But intelligent.”
“We are both intelligent,” Agustín said. “But the talent is Pablo!”
“But difficult to put up with. You do not know how ruined.”
“Yes. But a talent. Look, Pilar. To make war all you need is intelligence. But to win you
need talent and material.”
“I will think it over,” she said. “We must start now. We are late.” Then, raising her
voice, “English!” she called. “Inglés! Come on! Let us go.”
10
“Let us rest,” Pilar said to Robert Jordan. “Sit down here, Maria, and let us rest.”
“We should continue,” Robert Jordan said. “Rest when we get there. I must see this
man.”
“You will see him,” the woman told him. “There is no hurry. Sit down here, Maria.”
“Come on,” Robert Jordan said. “Rest at the top.”
“I rest now,” the woman said, and sat down by the stream. The girl sat by her in the
heather, the sun shining on her hair. Only Robert Jordan stood looking across the high
mountain meadow with the trout brook running through it. There was heather growing
where he stood. There were gray boulders rising from the yellow bracken that replaced
the heather in the lower part of the meadow and below was the dark line of the pines.
“How far is it to El Sordo’s?” he asked.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 54
“Not far,” the woman said. “It is across this open country, down into the next valley and
above the timber at the head of the stream. Sit thee down and forget thy seriousness.”
“I want to see him and get it over with.”
“I want to bathe my feet,” the woman said and, taking off her rope-soled shoes and
pulling off a heavy wool stocking, she put her right foot into the stream. “My God, it’s
cold.”
“We should have taken horses,” Robert Jordan told her.
“This is good for me,” the woman said. “This is what I have been missing. What’s the
matter with you?”
“Nothing, except that I am in a hurry.”
“Then calm yourself. There is much time. What a day it is and how I am contented not
to be in pine trees. You cannot imagine how one can tire of pine trees. Aren’t you tired
of the pines, guapa?”
“I like them,” the girl said.
“What can you like about them?”
“I like the odor and the feel of the needles under foot. I like the wind in the high trees
and the creaking they make against each other.”
“You like anything,” Pilar said. “You are a gift to any man if you could cook a little
better. But the pine tree makes a forest of boredom. Thou hast never known a forest of
beech, nor of oak, nor of chestnut. Those are forests. In such forests each tree differs
and there is character and beauty. A forest of pine trees is boredom. What do you say,
Inglés?”
“I like the pines, too.”
“Pero, venga,” Pilar said. “Two of you. So do I like the pines, but we have been too
long in these pines. Also I am tired of the mountains. In mountains there are only two
directions. Down and up and down leads only to the road and the towns of the Fascists.”
“Do you ever go to Segovia?”
“Qué va. With this face? This is a face that is known. How would you like to be ugly,
beautiful one?” she said to Maria.
“Thou art not ugly.”
“Vamos, I’m not ugly. I was born ugly. All my life I have been ugly. You, Inglés, who
know nothing about women. Do you know how an ugly woman feels? Do you know what
it is to be ugly all your life and inside to feel that you are beautiful? It is very rare,” she
put the other foot in the stream, then removed it. “God, it’s cold. Look at the water
wagtail,” she said and pointed to the gray ball of a bird that was bobbing up and down
on a stone up the stream. “Those are no good for anything. Neither to sing nor to eat.
Only to jerk their tails up and down. Give me a cigarette, Inglés,” she said and taking it,
lit it from a flint and steel lighter in the pocket of her skirt. She puffed on the cigarette
and looked at Maria and Robert Jordan.
“Life is very curious,” she said, and blew smoke from her nostrils. “I would have made
a good man, but I am all woman and all ugly. Yet many men have loved me and I have
loved many men. It is curious. Listen, Inglés, this is interesting. Look at me, as ugly as I
am. Look closely, Inglés.”
“Thou art not ugly.”
“Qué no? Don’t lie to me. Or,” she laughed the deep laugh. “Has it begun to work with
thee? No. That is a joke. No. Look at the ugliness. Yet one has a feeling within one that
blinds a man while he loves you. You, with that feeling, blind him, and blind yourself.
Then one day, for no reason, he sees you ugly as you really are and he is not blind any
more and then you see yourself as ugly as he sees you and you lose your man and your
feeling. Do you understand, guapa?” She patted the girl on the shoulder.
“No,” said Maria. “Because thou art not ugly.”
“Try to use thy head and not thy heart, and listen,” Pilar said. “I am telling you things of
much interest. Does it not interest you, Inglés?”
“Yes. But we should go.”
“Qué va, go. I am very well here. Then,” she went on, addressing herself to Robert“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 55
Jordan now as though she were speaking to a classroom; almost as though she were
lecturing. “After a while, when you are as ugly as I am, as ugly as women can be, then,
as I say, after a while the feeling, the idiotic feeling that you are beautiful, grows slowly
in one again. It grows like a cabbage. And then, when the feeling is grown, another man
sees you and thinks you are beautiful and it is all to do over. Now I think I am past it, but
it still might come. You are lucky, guapa, that you are not ugly.”
“But I am ugly,” Maria insisted.
“Ask him,” said Pilar. “And don’t put thy feet in the stream because it will freeze them.”
“If Roberto says we should go, I think we should go,” Maria said.
“Listen to you,” Pilar said. “I have as much at stake in this as thy Roberto and I say
that we are well off resting here by the stream and that there is much time. Furthermore,
I like to talk. It is the only civilized thing we have. How otherwise can we divert
ourselves? Does what I say not hold interest for you, Inglés?”
“You speak very well. But there are other things that interest me more than talk of
beauty or lack of beauty.”
“Then let us talk of what interests thee.”
“Where were you at the start of the movement?”
“In my town.”
“Avila?”
“Qué va, Avila.”
“Pablo said he was from Avila.”
“He lies. He wanted to take a big city for his town. It was this town,” and she named a
town.
“And what happened?”
“Much,” the woman said. “Much. And all of it ugly. Even that which was glorious.”
“Tell me about it,” Robert Jordan said.
“It is brutal,” the woman said. “I do not like to tell it before the girl.”
“Tell it,” said Robert Jordan. “And if it is not for her, that she should not listen.”
“I can hear it,” Maria said. She put her hand on Robert Jordan’s. “There is nothing that
I cannot hear.”
“It isn’t whether you can hear it,” Pilar said. “It is whether I should tell it to thee and
make thee bad dreams.”
“I will not get bad dreams from a story,” Maria told her. “You think after all that has
happened with us I should get bad dreams from a story?”
“Maybe it will give the Inglés bad dreams.”
“Try it and see.”
“No, Inglés, I am not joking. Didst thou see the start of the movement in any small
town?”
“No,” Robert Jordan said.
“Then thou hast seen nothing. Thou hast seen the ruin that now is Pablo, but you
should have seen Pablo on that day.”
“Tell it.”
“Nay. I do not want to.”
“Tell it.”
“All right, then. I will tell it truly as it was. But thee, guapa, if it reaches a point that it
molests thee, tell me.”
“I will not listen to it if it molests me,” Maria told her. “It cannot be worse than many
things.”
“I believe it can,” the woman said. “Give me another cigarette, Inglés, and vamonos.”
The girl leaned back against the heather on the bank of the stream and Robert Jordan
stretched himself out, his shoulders against the ground and his head against a clump of
the heather. He reached out and found Maria’s hand and held it in his, rubbing their two
hands against the heather until she opened her hand and laid it flat on top of his as they
listened.
“It was early in the morning when the civiles surrendered at the barracks,” Pilar began.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 56
“You had assaulted the barracks?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Pablo had surrounded it in the dark, cut the telephone wires, placed dynamite under
one wall and called on the guardia civil to surrender. They would not. And at daylight he
blew the wall open. There was fighting. Two civiles were killed. Four were wounded and
four surrendered.
“We all lay on roofs and on the ground and at the edge of walls and of buildings in the
early morning light and the dust cloud of the explosion had not yet settled, for it rose
high in the air and there was no wind to carry it, and all of us were firing into the broken
side of the building, loading and firing into the smoke, and from within there was still the
flashing of rifles and then there was a shout from in the smoke not to fire more, and out
came the four civiles with their hands up. A big part of the roof had fallen in and the wall
was gone and they came out to surrender.
“‘Are there more inside?’ Pablo shouted.
“‘There are wounded.’
“‘Guard these,’ Pablo said to four who had come up from where we were firing. ‘Stand
there. Against the wall,’ he told the civiles. The four civiles stood against the wall, dirty,
dusty, smoke-grimed, with the four who were guarding them pointing their guns at them
and Pablo and the others went in to finish the wounded.
“After they had done this and there was no longer any noise of the wounded, neither
groaning, nor crying out, nor the noise of shooting in the barracks, Pablo and the others
came out and Pablo had his shotgun over his back and was carrying in his hand a
Mauser pistol.
“‘Look, Pilar,’ he said. ‘This was in the hand of the officer who killed himself. Never
have I fired a pistol. You,’ he said to one of the guards, ‘show me how it works. No.
Don’t show me. Tell me.’
“The four civiles had stood against the wall, sweating and saying nothing while the
shooting had gone on inside the barracks. They were all tall men with the faces of
guardias civiles, which is the same model of face as mine is. Except that their faces
were covered with the small stubble of this their last morning of not yet being shaved
and they stood there against the wall and said nothing.
“‘You,’ said Pablo to the one who stood nearest him. ‘Tell me how it works.’
“‘Pull the small lever down,’ the man said in a very dry voice. ‘Pull the receiver back
and let it snap forward.’
“‘What is the receiver?’ asked Pablo, and he looked at the four civiles. ‘What is the
receiver?’
“‘The block on top of the action.’
“Pablo pulled it back, but it stuck. ‘What now?’ he said. ‘It is jammed. You have lied to
me.’
“‘Pull it farther back and let it snap lightly forward,’ the civil said, and I have never
heard such a tone of voice. It was grayer than a morning without sunrise.
“Pablo pulled and let go as the man had told him and the block snapped forward into
place and the pistol was cocked with the hammer back. It is an ugly pistol, small in the
round handle, large and flat in the barrel, and unwieldy. All this time the civiles had been
watching him and they had said nothing.
“‘What are you going to do with us?’ one asked him.
“‘Shoot thee,’ Pablo said.
“‘When?’ the man asked in the same gray voice.
“‘Now,’ said Pablo.
“‘Where?’ asked the man.
“‘Here,’ said Pablo. ‘Here. Now. Here and now. Have you anything to say?’
“‘Nada,’ said the civil. ‘Nothing. But it is an ugly thing.’
“‘And you are an ugly thing,’ Pablo said. ‘You murderer of peasants. You who would
shoot your own mother.’
“‘I have never killed any one,’ the civil said. ‘And do not speak of my mother.’
“‘Show us how to die. You, who have always done the killing.’“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 57
“‘There is no necessity to insult us,’ another civil said. ‘And we know how to die.’
“‘Kneel down against the wall with your heads against the wall,’ Pablo told them. The
civiles looked at one another.
“‘Kneel, I say,’ Pablo said. ‘Get down and kneel.’
“‘How does it seem to you, Paco?’ one civil said to the tallest, who had spoken with
Pablo about the pistol. He wore a corporal’s stripes on his sleeves and was sweating
very much although the early morning was still cool.
“‘It is as well to kneel,’ he answered. ‘It is of no importance.’
“‘It is closer to the earth,’ the first one who had spoken said, trying to make a joke, but
they were all too grave for a joke and no one smiled.
“‘Then let us kneel,’ the first civil said, and the four knelt, looking very awkward with
their heads against the wall and their hands by their sides, and Pablo passed behind
them and shot each in turn in the back of the head with the pistol, going from one to
another and putting the barrel of the pistol against the back of their heads, each man
slipping down as he fired. I can hear the pistol still, sharp and yet muffled, and see the
barrel jerk and the head of the man drop forward. One held his head still when the pistol
touched it. One pushed his head forward and pressed his forehead against the stone.
One shivered in his whole body and his head was shaking. Only one put his hands in
front of his eyes, and he was the last one, and the four bodies were slumped against the
wall when Pablo turned away from them and came toward us with the pistol still in his
hand.
“‘Hold this for me, Pilar,’ he said. ‘I do not know how to put down the hammer,’ and he
handed me the pistol and stood there looking at the four guards as they lay against the
wall of the barracks. All those who were with us stood there too, looking at them, and no
one said anything.
“We had won the town and it was still early in the morning and no one had eaten nor
had any one drunk coffee and we looked at each other and we were all powdered with
dust from the blowing up of the barracks, as powdered as men are at a threshing, and I
stood holding the pistol and it was heavy in my hand and I felt weak in the stomach
when I looked at the guards dead there against the wall; they all as gray and as dusty as
we were, but each one was now moistening with his blood the dry dirt by the wall where
they lay. And as we stood there the sun rose over the far hills and shone now on the
road where we stood and on the white wall of the barracks and the dust in the air was
golden in that first sun and the peasant who was beside me looked at the wall of the
barracks and what lay there and then looked at us and then at the sun and said, ‘Vaya,
a day that commences.’
“‘Now let us go and get coffee,’ I said.
“‘Good, Pilar, good,’ he said. And we went up into the town to the Plaza, and those
were the last people who were shot in the village.”
“What happened to the others?” Robert Jordan asked. “Were there no other fascists in
the village?”
“Qué va, were there no other fascists? There were more than twenty. But none was
shot.”
“What was done?”
“Pablo had them beaten to death with flails and thrown from the top of the cliff into the
river.”
“All twenty?”
“I will tell you. It is not so simple. And in my life never do I wish to see such a scene as
the flailing to death in the plaza on the top of the cliff above the river.
“The town is built on the high bank above the river and there is a square there with a
fountain and there are benches and there are big trees that give a shade for the
benches. The balconies of the houses look out on the plaza. Six streets enter on the
plaza and there is an arcade from the houses that goes around the plaza so that one
can walk in the shade of the arcade when the sun is hot. On three sides of the plaza is
the arcade and on the fourth side is the walk shaded by the trees beside the edge of the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 58
cliff with, far below, the river. It is three hundred feet down to the river.
“Pablo organized it all as he did the attack on the barracks. First he had the entrances
to the streets blocked off with carts as though to organize the plaze for a capea. For an
amateur bullfight. The fascists were all held in the Ayuntamiento, the city hall, which was
the largest building on one side of the plaza. It was there the clock was set in the wall
and it was in the buildings under the arcade that the club of the fascists was. And under
the arcade on the sidewalk in front of their club was where they had their chairs and
tables for their club. It was there, before the movement, that they were accustomed to
take the apéritifs. The chairs and the tables were of wicker. It looked like a café but was
more elegant.”
“But was there no fighting to take them?”
“Pablo had them seized in the night before he assaulted the barracks. But he had
already surrounded the barracks. They were all seized in their homes at the same hour
the attack started. That was intelligent. Pablo is an organizer. Otherwise he would have
had people attacking him at his flanks and at his rear while he was assaulting the
barracks of the guardia civil.
“Pablo is very intelligent but very brutal. He had this of the village well planned and
well ordered. Listen. After the assault was successful, and the last four guards had
surrendered, and he had shot them against the wall, and we had drunk coffee at the
café that always opened earliest in the morning by the corner from which the early bus
left, he proceeded to the organization of the plaza. Carts were piled exactly as for a
capea except that the side toward the river was not enclosed. That was left open. Then
Pablo ordered the priest to confess the fascists and give them the necessary
sacraments.”
“Where was this done?”
“In the Ayuntamiento, as I said. There was a great crowd outside and while this was
going on inside with the priest, there was some levity outside and shouting of
obscenities, but most of the people were very serious and respectful. Those who made
jokes were those who were already drunk from the celebration of the taking of the
barracks and there were useless characters who would have been drunk at any time.
“While the priest was engaged in these duties, Pablo organized those in the plaza into
two lines.
“He placed them in two lines as you would place men for a rope pulling contest, or as
they stand in a city to watch the ending of a bicycle road race with just room for the
cyclists to pass between, or as men stood to allow the passage of a holy image in a
procession. Two meters was left between the lines and they extended from the door of
the Ayuntamiento clear across the plaza to the edge of the cliff. So that, from the
doorway of the Ayuntamiento, looking across the plaza, one coming out would see two
solid lines of people waiting.
“They were armed with flails such as are used to beat out the grain and they were a
good flail’s length apart. All did not have flails, as enough flails could not be obtained.
But most had flails obtained from the store of Don Guillermo Martin, who was a fascist
and sold all sorts of agricultural implements. And those who did not have flails had
heavy herdsman’s clubs, or ox-goads, and some had wooden pitchforks; those with
wooden tines that are used to fork the chaff and straw into the air after the flailing. Some
had sickles and reaping hooks but these Pablo placed at the far end where the lines
reached the edge of the cliff.
“These lines were quiet and it was a clear day, as today is clear, and there were
clouds high in the sky, as there are now, and the plaza was not yet dusty for there had
been a heavy dew in the night, and the trees cast a shade over the men in the lines and
you could hear the water running from the brass pipe in the mouth of the lion and falling
into the bowl of the fountain where the women bring the water jars to fill them.
“Only near the Ayuntamiento, where the priest was complying with his duties with the
fascists, was there any ribaldry, and that came from those worthless ones who, as I
said, were already drunk and were crowded around the windows shouting obscenities“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 59
and jokes in bad taste in through the iron bars of the windows. Most of’ the men in the
lines were waiting quietly and I heard one say to another, ‘Will there be women?’
“And another said, ‘I hope to Christ, no.’
“Then one said, ‘Here is the woman of Pablo. Listen, Pilar. Will there be women?’
“I looked at him and he was a peasant dressed in his Sunday jacket and sweating
heavily and I said, ‘No, Joaquín. There are no women. We are not killing the women.
Why should we kill their women?’
“And he said, ‘Thanks be to Christ, there are no women and when does it start?’
“And I said, ‘As soon as the priest finishes.’
“‘And the priest?’
“‘I don’t know,’ I told him and I saw his face working and the sweat coming down on
his forehead. ‘I have never killed a man,’ he said.
“‘Then you will learn,’ the peasant next to him said. ‘But I do not think one blow with
this will kill a man,’ and he held his flail in both hands and looked at it with doubt.
“‘That is the beauty of it,’ another peasant said. ‘There must be many blows.’
“‘They have taken Valladolid. They have Avila,’ some one said. ‘I heard that before we
came into town.’
“‘They will never take this town. This town is ours. We have struck ahead of them,’ I
said. ‘Pablo is not one to wait for them to strike.’
“‘Pablo is able,’ another said. ‘But in this finishing off of the civiles he was egoistic.
Don’t you think so, Pilar?’
“‘Yes,’ I said. ‘But now all are participating in this.’
“‘Yes,’ he said. ‘It is well organized. But why do we not hear more news of the
movement?’
“‘Pablo cut the telephone wires before the assault on the barracks. They are not yet
repaired.’
“‘Ah,’ he said. ‘It is for this we hear nothing. I had my news from the roadmender’s
station early this morning.’
“‘Why is this done thus, Pilar?’ he said to me.
“‘To save bullets,’ I said. ‘And that each man should have his share in the
responsibility.’
“‘That it should start then. That it should start.’ And I looked at him and saw that he
was crying.
“‘Why are you crying, Joaquín?’ I asked him. ‘This is not to cry about’
“‘I cannot help it, Pilar,’ he said. ‘I have never killed any one.’
“If you have not seen the day of revolution in a small town where all know all in the
town and always have known all, you have seen nothing. And on this day most of the
men in the double line across the plaza wore the clothes in which they worked in the
fields, having come into town hurriedly, but some, not knowing how one should dress for
the first day of a movement, wore their clothes for Sundays or holidays, and these,
seeing that the others, including those who had attacked the barracks, wore their oldest
clothes, were ashamed of being wrongly dressed. But they did not like to take off their
jackets for fear of losing them, or that they might be stolen by the worthless ones, and
so they stood, sweating in the sun and waiting for it to commence.
“Then the wind rose and the dust was now dry in the plaza for the men walking and
standing and shuffling had loosened it and it commenced to blow and a man in a dark
blue Sunday jacket shouted ‘Agua! Agua!’ and the caretaker of the plaza, whose duty it
was to sprinkle the plaza each morning with a hose, came and turned the hose on and
commenced to lay the dust at the edge of the plaza, and then toward the center. Then
the two lines fell back and let him lay the dust over the center of the plaza; the hose
sweeping in wide arcs and the water glistening in the sun and the men leaning on their
flails or the clubs or the white wood pitchforks and watching the sweep of the stream of
water. And then, when the plaza was nicely moistened and the dust settled, the lines
formed up again and a peasant shouted, ‘When do we get the first fascist? When does
the first one come out of the box?’“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 60
“‘Soon,’ Pablo shouted from the door of the Ayuntamiento. ‘Soon the first one comes
out.’ His voice was hoarse from shouting in the assault and from the smoke of the
barracks.
“‘What’s the delay?’ some one asked.
“‘They’re still occupied with their sins,’ Pablo shouted.
“‘Clearly, there are twenty of them,’ a man said.
“‘More,’ said another.
“‘Among twenty there are many sins to recount.’
“‘Yes, but I think it’s a trick to gain time. Surely facing such an emergency one could
not remember one’s sins except for the biggest.’
“‘Then have patience. For with more than twenty of them there are enough of the
biggest sins to take some time.’
“‘I have patience,’ said the other. ‘But it is better to get it over with. Both for them and
for us. It is July and there is much work. We have harvested but we have not threshed.
We are not yet in the time of fairs and festivals.’
“‘But this will be a fair and festival today,’ another said. ‘The Fair of Liberty and from
this day, when these are extinguished, the town and the land are ours.’
“‘We thresh fascists today,’ said one, ‘and out of the chaff comes the freedom of this
pueblo.’
“‘We must administer it well to deserve it,’ said another. ‘Pilar,’ he said to me, ‘when
do we have a meeting for organization?’
“‘Immediately after this is completed,’ I told him. ‘In the same building of the
Ayuntamiento.’
“I was wearing one of the three-cornered patent leather hats of the guardia civil as a
joke and I had put the hammer down on the pistol, holding it with my thumb to lower it as
I pulled on the trigger as seemed natural, and the pistol was held in a rope I had around
my waist, the long barrel stuck under the rope. And when I put it on the joke seemed
very good to me, although afterwards I wished I had taken the holster of the pistol
instead of the hat. But one of the men in the line said to me, ‘Pilar, daughter. It seems to
me bad taste for thee to wear that hat. Now we have finished with such things as the
guardia civil.’
“‘Then,’ I said, ‘I will take it off.’ And I did.
“‘Give it to me,’ he said. ‘It should be destroyed.’
“And as we were at the far end of the line where the walk runs along the cliff by the
river, he took the hat in his hand and sailed it off over the cliff with the motion a
herdsman makes throwing a stone underhand at the bulls to herd them. The hat sailed
far out into space and we could see it smaller and smaller, the patent leather shining in
the clear air, sailing down to the river. I looked back over the square and at all the
windows and all the balconies there were people crowded and there was the double line
of men across the square to the doorway of the Ayuntamiento and the crowd swarmed
Outside against the windows of that building and there was the noise of many people
talking, and then I heard a shout and some one said ‘Here comes the first one,’ and it
was Don Benito Garcia, the Mayor, and he came out bareheaded walking slowly from
the door and down the porch and nothing happened; and he walked between the line of
men with the flails and nothing happened. He passed two men, four men, eight men, ten
men and nothing happened and he was walking between that line of men, his head up,
his fat face gray, his eyes looking ahead and then flickering from side to side and
walking steadily. And nothing happened.
“From a balcony some one cried out, ‘Qué pasa, cobardes? What is the matter,
cowards?’ and still Don Benito walked along between the men and nothing happened.
Then I saw a man three men down from where I was standing and his face was working
and he was biting his lips and his hands were white on his flail. I saw him looking toward
Don Benito, watching him come on. And still nothing happened. Then, just before Don
Benito came abreast of this man, the man raised his flail high so that it struck the man
beside him and smashed a blow at Don Benito that hit him on the side of the head and“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 61
Don Benito looked at him and the man struck again and shouted, ‘That for you, Cabron,’
and the blow hit Don Benito in the face and he raised his hands to his face and they
beat him until he fell and the man who had struck him first called to others to help him
and he pulled on the collar of Don Benito’s shirt and others took hold of his arms and
with his face in the dust of the plaza, they dragged him over the walk to the edge of the
cliff and threw him over and into the river. And the man who hit him first was kneeling by
the edge of the cliff looking over after him and saying, ‘The Cabron! The Cabron! Oh,
the Cabron!’ He was a tenant of Don Benito and they had never gotten along together.
There had been a dispute about a piece of land by the river that Don Benito had taken
from this man and let to another and this man had long hated him. This man did not join
the line again but sat by the cliff looking down where Don Benito had fallen.
“After Don Benito no one would come out. There was no noise now in the plaza as all
were waiting to see who it was that would come out. Then a drunkard shouted in a great
voice, ‘Qué salga el toro! Let the bull out!’
“Then some one from by the windows of the Ayuntamiento yelled, ‘They won’t move!
They are all praying!’
“Another drunkard shouted, ‘Pull them out. Come on, pull them out. The time for
praying is finished.’
“But none came out and then I saw a man coming out of the door.
“It was Don Federico Gonzalez, who owned the mill and feed store and was a fascist
of the first order. He was tall and thin and his hair was brushed over the top of his head
from one side to the other to cover a baldness and he wore a nightshirt that was tucked
into his trousers. He was barefooted as when he had been taken from his home and he
walked ahead of Pablo holding his hands above his head, and Pablo walked behind him
with the barrels of his shotgun pressing against the back of Don Federico Gonzalez until
Don Federico entered the double line. But when Pablo left him and returned to the door
of the Ayuntamiento, Don Federico could not walk forward, and stood there, his eyes
turned up to heaven and his hands reaching up as though they would grasp the sky.
“‘He has no legs to walk,’ some one said.
“‘What’s the matter, Don Federico? Can’t you walk?’ some one shouted to him. But
Don Federico stood there with his hands up and only his lips were moving.
“‘Get on,’ Pablo shouted to him from the steps. ‘Walk.’
“Don Federico stood there and could not move. One of the drunkards poked him in the
backside with a flail handle and Don Federico gave a quick jump as a balky horse might,
but still stood in the same place, his hands up, and his eyes up toward the sky.
“Then the peasant who stood beside me said, ‘This is shameful. I have nothing
against him but such a spectacle must terminate.’ So he walked down the line and
pushed through to where Don Federico was standing and said, ‘With your permission,’
and hit him a great blow alongside of the head with a club.
“Then Don Federico dropped his hands and put them over the top of his head where
the bald place was and with his head bent and covered by his hands, the thin long hairs
that covered the bald place escaping through his fingers, he ran fast through the double
line With flails falling on his back and shoulders until he fell and those at the end of the
line picked him up and swung him over the cliff. Never did he open his mouth from the
moment he came out pushed by the shotgun of Pablo. His only difficulty was to move
forward. It was as though he had no command of his legs.
“After Don Federico, I saw there was a concentration of the hardest men at the end of
the lines by the edge of the cliff and I left there and I went to the Arcade of the
Ayuntamiento and pushed aside two drunkards and looked in the window. In the big
room of the Ayuntamiento they were all kneeling in a half circle praying and the priest
was kneeling and praying with them. Pablo and one named Cuatro Dedos, Four
Fingers, a cobbler, who was much with Pablo then, and two others were standing with
shotguns and Pablo said to the priest, ‘Who goes now?’ and the priest went on praying
and did not answer him.
“‘Listen, you,’ Pablo said to the priest in his hoarse voice, ‘who goes now? Who is“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 62
ready now?’
“The priest would not speak to Pablo and acted as though he were not there and I
could see Pablo was becoming very angry.
“‘Let us all go together,’ Don Ricardo Montalvo, who was a land owner, said to Pablo,
raising his head and stopping praying to speak.
“‘Qué va,’ said Pablo. ‘One at a time as you are ready.’
“‘Then I go now,’ Don Ricardo said. ‘I’ll never be any more ready.’ The priest blessed
him as he spoke and blessed him again as he stood up, without interrupting his praying,
and held up a crucifix for Don Ricardo to kiss and Don Ricardo kissed it and then turned
and said to Pablo, ‘Nor ever again as ready. You Cabron of the bad milk. Let us go.’
“Don Ricardo was a short man with gray hair and a thick neck and he had a shirt on
with no collar. He was bow-legged from much horseback riding. ‘Good-by,’ he said to all
those who were kneeling. ‘Don’t be sad. To die is nothing. The only bad thing is to die at
the hands of this canalla. Don’t touch me,’ he said to Pablo. ‘Don’t touch me with your
shotgun.’
“He walked out of the front of the Ayuntamiento with his gray hair and his small gray
eyes and his thick neck looking very short and angry. He looked at the double line of
peasants and he spat on the ground. He could spit actual saliva which, in such a
circumstance, as you should know, Inglés, is very rare and he said, ‘Arriba Espana!
Down with the miscalled Republic and I obscenity in the milk of your fathers.’
“So they clubbed him to death very quickly because of the insult, beating him as soon
as he reached the first of the men, beating him as he tried to walk with his head up,
beating him until he fell and chopping at him with reaping hooks and the sickles, and
many men bore him to the edge of the cliff to throw him over and there was blood now
on their hands and on their clothing, and now began to be the feeling that these who
came out were truly enemies and should be killed.
“Until Don Ricardo came out with that fierceness and calling those insults, many in the
line would have given much, I am sure, never to have been in the line. And if any one
had shouted from the line, ‘Come, let us pardon the rest of them. Now they have had
their lesson,’ I am sure most would have agreed.
“But Don Ricardo with all his bravery did a great disservice to the others. For he
aroused the men in the line and where, before, they were performing a duty and with no
great taste for it, now they were angry, and the difference was apparent.
“‘Let the priest out and the thing will go faster,’ some one shouted.
“‘Let out the priest.’
“‘We’ve had three thieves, let us have the priest.’
“‘Two thieves,’ a short peasant said to the man who had shouted. ‘It was two thieves
with Our Lord.’
“‘Whose Lord?’ the man said, his face angry and red.
“‘In the manner of speaking it is said Our Lord.’
“‘He isn’t my Lord; not in joke,’ said the other. ‘And thee hadst best watch thy mouth if
thou dost not want to walk between the lines.’
“‘I am as good a Libertarian Republican as thou,’ the short peasant said. ‘I struck Don
Ricardo across the mouth. I struck Don Federico across the back. I missed Don Benito.
But I say Our Lord is the formal way of speaking of the man in question and that it was
two thieves.’
“‘I obscenity in the milk of thy Republicanism. You speak of Don this and Don that.’
“‘Here are they so called.’
“‘Not by me, the cabrones. And thy Lord— Hi! Here comes a new one!’
“It was then that we saw a disgraceful sight, for the man who walked out of the
doorway of the Ayuntamiento was Don Faustino Rivero, the oldest son of his father, Don
Celestino Rivero, a land owner. He was tall and his hair was yellow and it was freshly
combed back from his forehead for he always carried a comb in his pocket and he had
combed his hair now before coming out. He was a great annoyer of girls, and he was a
coward, and he had always wished to be an amateur bullfighter. He went much with“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 63
gypsies and with builfighters and with bull raisers and delighted to wear the Andalucian
costume, but he had no courage and was considered a joke. One time he was
announced to appear in an amateur benefit fight for the old people’s home in Avila and
to kill a bull from on horseback in the Andalucian style, which he had spent much time
practising, and when he had seen the size of the bull that had been substituted for him
in place of the little one, weak in the legs, he had picked out himself, he had said he was
sick and, some said, put three fingers down his throat to make himself vomit.
“When the lines saw him, they commenced to shout, ‘Hola, Don Faustino. Take care
not to vomit.’
“‘Listen to me, Don Faustino. There are beautiful girls over the cliff.’
“‘Don Faustino. Wait a minute and we will bring out a bull bigger than the other.’
“And another shouted, ‘Listen to me, Don Faustino. Hast thou ever heard speak of
death?’
“Don Faustino stood there, still acting brave. He was still under the impulse that had
made him announce to the others that he was going out. It was the same impulse that
had made him announce himself for the bullfight. That had made him believe and hope
that he could be an amateur matador. Now he was inspired by the example of Don
Ricardo and he stood there looking both handsome and brave and he made his face
scornful. But he could not speak.
“‘Come, Don Faustino,’ some one called from the line. ‘Come, Don Faustino. Here is
the biggest bull of all.’
“Don Faustino stood looking out and I think as he looked, that there was no pity for
him on either side of the line. Still he looked both handsome and superb; but time was
shortening and there was only one direction to go.
“‘Don Faustino,’ some one called. ‘What are you waiting for, Don Faustino?’
“‘He is preparing to vomit,’ some one said and the lines laughed.
“‘Don Faustino,’ a peasant called. ‘Vomit if it will give thee pleasure. To me it is all the
same.’
“Then, as we watched, Don Faustino looked along the lines and across the square to
the cliff and then when he saw the cliff and the emptiness beyond, he turned quickly and
ducked back toward the entrance of the Ayuntamiento.
“All the lines roared and some one shouted in a high voice, ‘Where do you go, Don
Faustino? Where do you go?’
“‘He goes to throw up,’ shouted another and they all laughed again.
“Then we saw Don Faustino coming out again with Pablo behind him with the shotgun.
All of his style was gone now. The sight of the lines had taken away his type and his
style and he came out now with Pablo behind him as though Pablo were cleaning a
Street and Don Faustino was what he was pushing ahead of him. Don Faustino came
out now and he was crossing himself and praying and then he put his hands in front of
his eyes and walked down the steps toward the lines.
“‘Leave him alone,’ some one shouted. ‘Don’t touch him.’
“The lines understood and no one made a move to touch Don Faustino and, with his
hands shaking and held in front of his eyes, and with his mouth moving, he walked
along between the lines.
“No one said anything and no one touched him and, when he was halfway through the
lines, he could go no farther and fell to his knees.
“No one struck him. I was walking along parallel to the line to see what happened to
him and a peasant leaned down and lifted him to his feet and said, ‘Get up, Don
Faustino, and keep walking. The bull has not yet come out.’
“Don Faustino could not walk alone and the peasant in a black smock helped him on
one side and another peasant in a black smock and herdsman’s boots helped him on
the other, supporting him by the arms and Don Faustino walking along between the
lines with his hands over his eyes, his lips never quiet, and his yellow hair slicked on his
head and shining in the sun, and as he passed the peasants would say, ‘Don Faustino,
buen provecho. Don Faustino, that you should have a good appetite,’ and others said,“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 64
‘Don Faustino, a sus ordenes. Don Faustino at your orders,’ and one, who had failed at
bullfighting himself, said, ‘Don Faustino. Matador, a sus ordenes,’ and another said,
‘Don Faustino, there are beautiful girls in heaven, Don Faustino.’ And they walked Don
Faustino through the lines, holding him close on either side, holding him up as he
walked, with him with his hands over his eyes. But he must have looked through his
fingers, because when they came to the edge of the cliff with him, he knelt again,
throwing himself down and clutching the ground and holding to the grass, saying, ‘No.
No. No. Please. NO. Please. Please. No. No.’
“Then the peasants who were with him and the others, the hard ones of the end of the
line, squatted quickly behind him as he knelt, and gave him a rushing push and he was
over the edge without ever having been beaten and you heard him crying loud and high
as he fell.
“It was then I knew that the lines had become cruel and it was first the insults of Don
Ricardo and second the cowardice of Don Faustino that had made them so.
“‘Let us have another,’ a peasant called out and another peasant slapped him on the
back and said, ‘Don Faustino! What a thing! Don Faustino!’
“‘He’s seen the big bull now,’ another said. ‘Throwing up will never help him, now.’
“‘In my life,’ another peasant said, ‘in my life I’ve never seen a thing like Don Faustino.’
“‘There are others,’ another peasant said. ‘Have patience. Who knows what we may
yet see?’
“‘There may be giants and dwarfs,’ the first peasant said. ‘There may be Negroes and
rare beasts from Africa. But for me never, never will there be anything like Don Faustino.
But let’s have another one! Come on. Let’s have another one!’
“The drunkards were handing around bottles of anis and cognac that they had looted
from the bar of the club of the fascists, drinking them down like wine, and many of the
men in the lines were beginning to be a little drunk, too, from drinking after the strong
emotion of Don Benito, Don Federico, Don Ricardo and especially Don Faustino. Those
who did not drink from the bottles of liquor were drinking from leather wineskins that
were passed about and one handed a wineskin to me and I took a long drink, letting the
wine run cool down my throat from the leather bota for I was very thirsty, too.
“‘To kill gives much thirst,’ the man with the wineskin said to me.
“‘Qué va,’ I said. ‘Hast thou killed?’
“‘We have killed four,’ he said, proudly. ‘Not counting the civiles. Is it true that thee
killed one of the civiles, Pilar?’
“‘Not one,’ I said. ‘I shot into the smoke when the wall fell, as did the others. That is
all.’
“‘Where got thee the pistol, Pilar?’
“‘From Pablo. Pablo gave it to me after he killed the civiles.’
“‘Killed he them with this pistol?’
“‘With no other,’ I said. ‘And then he armed me with it.’
“‘Can I see it, Pilar? Can I hold it?’
“‘Why not, man?’ I said, and I took it out from under the rope and handed it to him. But
I was wondering why no one else had come out and just then who should come out but
Don Guillermo Martin from whose store the flails, the herdsman’s clubs, and the wooden
pitchforks had been taken. Don Guillermo was a fascist but otherwise there Was nothing
against him.
“It is true he paid little to those who made the flails but he charged little for them too
and if one did not wish to buy flails from Don Guillermo, it was possible to make them for
nothing more than the cost of the wood and the leather. He had a rude way of speaking
and he was undoubtedly a fascist and a member of their club and he sat at noon and at
evening in the cane chairs of their club to read El Debate, to have his shoes shined, and
to drink vermouth and seltzer and eat roasted almonds, dried shrimps, and anchovies.
But one does not kill for that, and I am sure if it had not been for the insults of Don
Ricardo Montalvo and the lamentable spectacle of Don Faustino, and the drinking
consequent on the emotion of them and the others, some one would have shouted,“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 65
‘That Don Guillermo should go in peace. We have his flails. Let him go.’
“Because the people of this town are as kind as they can be cruel and they have a
natural sense of justice and a desire to do that which is right. But cruelty had entered
into the lines and also drunkenness or the beginning of drunkenness and the lines were
not as they were when Don Benito had come out. I do not know how it is in other
countries, and no one cares more for the pleasure of drinking than I do, but in Spain
drunkenness, when produced by other elements than wine, is a thing of great ugliness
and the people do things that they would not have done. Is it not so in your country,
Inglés?”
“It is so,” Robert Jordan said. “When I was seven years old and going with my mother
to attend a wedding in the state of Ohio at which I was to be the boy of a pair of boy and
girl who carried flowers—”
“Did you do that?” asked Maria. “How nice!”
“In this town a Negro was hanged to a lamp post and later burned. It was an arc light.
A light which lowered from the post to the pavement. And he was hoisted, first by the
mechanism which was used to hoist the arc light but this broke—”
“A Negro,” Maria said. “How barbarous!”
“Were the people drunk?” asked Pilar. “Were they drunk thus to burn a Negro?”
“I do not know,” Robert Jordan said. “Because I saw it only looking out from under the
blinds of a window in the house which stood on the corner where the arc light was. The
street was full of people and when they lifted the Negro up for the second time—”
“If you had only seven years and were in a house, you could not tell if they were drunk
or not,” Pilar said.
“As I said, when they lifted the Negro up for the second time, my mother pulled me
away from the window, so I saw no more,” Robert Jordan said. “But since I have had
experiences which demonstrate that drunkenness is the same in my country. It is ugly
and brutal.”
“You were too young at seven,” Maria said. “You were too young for such things. I
have never seen a Negro except in a circus. Unless the Moors are Negroes.”
“Some are Negroes and some are not,” Pilar said. “I can talk to you of the Moors.”
“Not as I can,” Maria said. “Nay, not as I can.”
“Don’t speak of such things,” Pilar said. “It is unhealthy. Where were we?”
“Speaking of the drunkenness of the lines,” Robert Jordan said. “Go on.”
“It is not fair to say drunkenness,” Pilar said. “For, yet, they were a long way from
drunkenness. But already there was a change in them, and when Don Guillermo came
out, standing straight, near-sighted, gray-headed, of medium height, with a shirt with a
collar button but no collar, standing there and crossing himself once and looking ahead,
but seeing little without his glasses, but walking forward well and calmly, he was an
appearance to excite pity. But some one shouted from the line, ‘Here, Don Guillermo.
Up here, Don Guillermo. In this direction. Here we all have your products.’
“They had had such success joking at Don Faustino that they could not see, now, that
Don Guillermo was a different thing, and if Don Guillermo was to be killed, he should be
killed quickly and with dignity.
“‘Don Guillermo,’ another shouted. ‘Should we send to the house for thy spectacles?’
“Don Guillermo’s house was no house, since he had not much money and was only a
fascist to be a snob and to console himself that he must work for little, running a
wooden-implement shop. He was a fascist, too, from the religiousness of his wife which
he accepted as his own due to his love for her. He lived in an apartment in the building
three houses down the square and when Don Guillermo stood there, looking near-
sightedly at the lines, the double lines he knew he must enter, a woman started to
scream from the balcony of the apartment where he lived. She could see him from the
balcony and she was his wife.
“‘Guillermo,’ she cried. ‘Guillermo. Wait and I will be with thee.’
“Don Guillermo turned his head toward where the shouting came from. He could not
see her. He tried to say something but he could not. Then he waved his hand in the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 66
direction the woman had called from and started to walk between the lines.
“‘Guillermo!’ she cried. ‘Guillermo! Oh, Guillermo!’ She was holding her hands on the
rail of the balcony and shaking back and forth. ‘Guillermo!’
“Don Guillermo waved his hand again toward the noise and walked into the lines with
his head up and you would not have known what he was feeling except for the color of
his face.
“Then some drunkard yelled, ‘Guillermo!’ from the lines, imitating the high cracked
voice of his wife and Don Guillermo rushed toward the man, blindly, with tears now
running down his cheeks and the man hit him hard across the face with his flail and Don
Guillermo sat down from the force of the blow and sat there crying, but not from fear,
while the drunkards beat him and one drunkard jumped on top of him, astride his
shoulders, and beat him with a bottle. After this many of the men left the lines and their
places were taken by the drunkards who had been jeering and saying things in bad
taste through the windows of the Ayuntamiento.
“I myself had felt much emotion at the shooting of the guardia civil by Pablo,” Pilar
said. “It was a thing of great ugliness, but I had thought if this is how it must be, this is
how it must be, and at least there was no cruelty, only the depriving of life which, as we
all have learned in these years, is a thing of ugliness but also a necessity to do if we are
to win, and to preserve the Republic.
“When the square had been closed off and the lines formed, I had admired and
understood it as a conception of Pablo, although it seemed to me to be somewhat
fantastic and that it would be necessary for all that was to be done to be done in good
taste if it were not to be repugnant. Certainly if the fascists were to be executed by the
people, it was better for all the people to have a part in it, and I wished to share the guilt
as much as any, just as I hoped to share in the benefits when the town should be ours.
But after Don Guillermo I felt a feeling of shame and distaste, and with the coming of the
drunkards and the worthless ones into the lines, and the abstention of those who left the
lines as a protest after Don Guillermo, I wished that I might disassociate myself
altogether from the lines, and I walked away, across the square, and sat down on a
bench under one of the big trees that gave shade there.
“Two peasants from the lines walked over, talking together, and one of them called to
me, ‘What passes with thee, Pilar?’
“‘Nothing, man,’ I told him.
“‘Yes,’ he said. ‘Speak. What passes.’
“‘I think that I have a belly-full,’ I told him.
“‘Us, too,’ he said and they both sat down on the bench. One of them had a leather
wineskin and he handed it to me.
“‘Rinse out thy mouth,’ he said and the other said, going on with the talking they had
been engaged in, ‘The worst is that it will bring bad luck. Nobody can tell me that such
things as the killing of Don Guillermo in that fashion will not bring bad luck.’
“Then the other said, ‘If it is necessary to kill them all, and I am not convinced of that
necessity, let them be killed decently and without mockery.’
“‘Mockery is justified in the case of Don Faustino,’ the other said. ‘Since he was
always a farcer and was never a serious man. But to mock such a serious man as Don
Guillermo is beyond all right.’
“‘I have a belly-full,’ I told him, and it was literally true because I felt an actual sickness
in all of me inside and a sweating and a nausea as though I had swallowed bad sea
food.
“‘Then, nothing,’ the one peasant said. ‘We will take no further part in it. But I wonder
what happens in the other towns.’
“‘They have not repaired the telephone wires yet,’ I said. ‘It is a lack that should be
remedied.’
“‘Clearly,’ he said. ‘Who knows but what we might be better employed putting the town
into a state of defense than massacring people with this slowness and brutality.’
“‘I will go to speak with Pablo, I told them and I stood up from the bench and started“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 67
toward the arcade that led to the door of the Ayuntamiento from where the lines spread
across the square. The lines now were neither straight nor orderly and there was much
and very grave drunkenness. Two men had fallen down and lay on their backs in the
middle of the square and were passing a bottle back and forth between them. One
would take a drink and then shout, ‘Viva la Anarquia!’ lying on his back and shouting as
though he were a madman. He had a red-and-black handkerchief around his neck. The
other shouted, ‘Viva la Libertad!’ and kicked his feet in the air and then bellowed, ‘Viva
la Libertad!’ again. He had a red-andblack handkerchief too and he waved it in one hand
and waved the bottle with the other.
“A peasant who had left the lines and now stood in the shade of the arcade looked at
them in disgust and said, ‘They should shout, “Long live drunkenness.” That’s all they
believe in.’
“‘They don’t believe even in that,’ another peasant said. ‘Those neither understand nor
believe in anything.’
“Just then, one of the drunkards got to his feet and raised both arms with his fists
clenched over his head and shouted, ‘Long live Anarchy and Liberty and I obscenity in
the milk of the Republic!’
“The other drunkard who was still lying on his back, took hold of the ankle of the
drunkard who was shouting and rolled over so that the shouting drunkard fell with him,
and they rolled over together and then sat up and the one who had pulled the other
down put his arm around the shouter’s neck and then handed the shouter a bottle and
kissed the red-and-black handkerchief he wore and they both drank together.
“Just then, a yelling went up from the lines and, looking up the arcade, I could not see
who it was that was coming out because the man’s head did not show above the heads
of those crowded about the door of the Ayuntamiento. All I could see was that some one
was being pushed out by Pablo and Cuatro Dedos with their shotguns but I could not
see who it was and I moved on close toward the lines where they were packed against
the door to try to see.
“There was much pushing now and the chairs and the tables of the fascists’ café had
been overturned except for one table on which a drunkard was lying with his head
hanging down and his mouth open and I picked up a chair and set it against one of the
pillars and mounted on it so that I could see over the heads of the crowd.
“The man who was being pushed out by Pablo and Cuatro Dedos was Don Anastasio
Rivas, who was an undoubted fascist and the fattest man in the town. He was a grain
buyer and the agent for several insurance companies and he also loaned money at high
rates of interest. Standing on the chair, I saw him walk down the steps and toward the
lines, his fat neck bulging over the back of the collar band of his shirt, and his bald head
shining in the sun, but he never entered them because there was a shout, not as of
different men shouting, but of all of them. It was an ugly noise and was the cry of the
drunken lines all yelling together and the lines broke with the rush of men toward him
and I saw Don Anastasio throw himself down with his hands over his head and then you
could not see him for the men piled on top of him. And when the men got up from him,
Don Anastasio was dead from his head being beaten against the stone flags of the
paving of the arcade and there were no more lines but only a mob.
“‘We’re going in,’ they commenced to shout. ‘We’re going in after them.’
“‘He’s too heavy to carry,’ a man kicked at the body of Don Anastasio, who was lying
there on his face. ‘Let him stay there.’
“‘Why should we lug that tub of tripe to the cliff? Let him lie there.’
“‘We are going to enter and finish with them inside,’ a man shouted. ‘We’re going in.’
“‘Why wait all day in the sun?’ another yelled. ‘Come on. Let us go.’
“The mob was now pressing into the arcade. They were shouting and pushing and
they made a noise now like an animal and they were all shouting ‘Open up! Open up!’
for the guards had shut the doors of the Ayuntamiento when the lines broke.
“Standing on the chair, I could see in through the barred window into the hail of the
Ayuntamiento and in there it was as it had been before. The priest was standing, and“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 68
those who were left were kneeling in a half circle around him and they were all praying.
Pablo was sitting on the big table in front of the Mayor’s chair with his shotgun slung
over his back. His legs were hanging down from the table and he was rolling a cigarette.
Cuatro Dedos was sitting in the Mayor’s chair with his feet on the table and he was
smoking a cigarette. All the guards were sitting in different chairs of the administration,
holding their guns. The key to the big door was on the table beside Pablo.
“The mob was shouting, ‘Open up! Open up! Open up!’ as though it were a chant and
Pablo was sitting there as though he did not hear them. He said something to the priest
but I could not hear what he said for the noise of the mob.
“The priest, as before, did not answer him but kept on praying. With many people
pushing me, I moved the chair close against the wall, shoving it ahead of me as they
shoved me from behind. I stood on the chair with my face close against the bars of the
window and held on by the bars. A man climbed on the chair too and stood with his
arms around mine, holding the wider bars.
“‘The chair will break,’ I said to him.
“‘What does it matter?’ he said. ‘Look at them. Look at them pray.’
“His breath on my neck smelled like the smell of the mob, sour, like vomit on paving
stones and the smell of drunkenness, and then he put his mouth against the opening in
the bars with his head over my shoulder, and shouted, ‘Open up! Open!’ and it was as
though the mob were on my back as a devil is on your back in a dream.
“Now the mob was pressed tight against the door so that those in front were being
crushed by all the others who were pressing and from the square a big drunkard in a
black smock with a red-and-black handkerchief around his neck, ran and threw himself
against the press of the mob and fell forward onto the pressing men and then stood up
and backed away and then ran forward again and threw himself against the backs of
those men who were pushing, shouting, ‘Long live me and long live Anarchy.’
“As I watched, this man turned away from the crowd and went and sat down and
drank from a bottle and then, while he was sitting down, he saw Don Anastasio, who
was still lying face down on the stones, but much trampled now, and the drunkard got up
and went over to Don Anastasio and leaned over and poured out of the bottle onto the
head of Don Anastasio and onto his clothes, and then he took a matchbox out of his
pocket and lit several matches, trying to make a fire with Don Anastasio. But the wind
was blowing hard now and it blew the matches out and after a little the big drunkard sat
there by Don Anastasio, shaking his head and drinking out of the bottle and every once
in a while, leaning over and patting Don Anastasio on the shoulders of his dead body.
“All this time the mob was shouting to open up and the man on the chair with me was
holding tight to the bars of the window and shouting to open up until it deafened me with
his voice roaring past my ear and his breath foul on me and I looked away from
watching the drunkard who had been trying to set fire to Don Anastasio and into the hall
of the Ayuntamiento again; and it was just as it had been. They were still praying as they
had been, the men all kneeling, with their shirts open, some with their heads down,
others with their heads up, looking toward the priest and toward the crucifix that he held,
and the priest praying fast and hard and looking Out over their heads, and in back of
them Pablo, with his cigarette now lighted, was sitting there on the table swinging his
legs, his shotgun slung over his back, and he was playing with the key.
“I saw Pablo speak to the priest again, leaning forward from the table and I could not
hear what he said for the shouting. But the priest did not answer him but went on
praying. Then a man stood up from among the half circle of those who were praying and
I saw he wanted to go out. It was Don José Castro, whom every one called Don Pepe, a
confirmed fascist, and a dealer in horses, and he stood up now small, neat-looking even
unshaven and wearing a pajama top tucked into a pair of gray-striped trousers. He
kissed the crucifix and the priest blessed him and he stood up and looked at Pablo and
jerked his head toward the door.
“Pablo shook his head and went on smoking. I could see Don Pepe say something to
Pablo but could not hear it. Pablo did not answer; he simply shook his head again and“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 69
nodded toward the door.
“Then I saw Don Pepe look full at the door and realized that he had not known it was
locked. Pablo showed him the key and he Stood looking at it an instant and then he
turned and went and knelt down again. I saw the priest look around at Pablo and Pablo
grinned at him and showed him the key and the priest seemed to realize for the first time
that the door was locked and he seemed as though he started to shake his head, but he
only inclined it and went back to praying.
“I do not know how they could not have understood the door was locked unless it was
that they were so concentrated on their praying and their own thoughts; but now they
certainly understood and they understood the shouting and they must have known now
that all was changed. But they remained the same as before.
“By now the shouting was so that you could hear nothing and the drunkard who stood
on the chair with me shook with his hands at the bars and yelled, ‘Open up! Open up!’
until he was hoarse.
“I watched Pablo speak to the priest again and the priest did not answer. Then I saw
Pablo unsling his shotgun and he reached over and tapped the priest on the shoulder
with it. The priest paid no attention to him and I saw Pablo shake his head. Then he
spoke over his shoulder to Cuatro Dedos and Cuatro Dedos spoke to the other guards
and they all stood up and walked back to the far end of the room and stood there with
their shotguns.
“I saw Pablo say something to Cuatro Dedos and he moved over two tables and some
benches and the guards stood behind them with their shotguns. It made a barricade in
that corner of the room. Pablo leaned over and tapped the priest on the shoulder again
with the shotgun and the priest did not pay attention to him but I saw Don Pepe
watching him while the others paid no attention but went on praying. Pablo shook his
head and, seeing Don Pepe looking at him, he shook his head at Don Pepe and showed
him the key, holding it up in his hand. Don Pepe understood and he dropped his head
and commenced to pray very fast.
“Pablo swung his legs down from the table and walked around it to the big chair of the
Mayor on the raised platform behind the long council table. He sat down in it and rolled
himself a cigarette, all the time watching the fascists who were praying with the priest.
You could not see any expression on his face at all. The key was on the table in front of
him. It was a big key of iron, over a foot long. Then Pablo called to the guards
something I could not hear and one guard went down to the door. I could see them all
praying faster than ever and I knew that they all knew now.
“Pablo said something to the priest but the priest did not answer. Then Pablo leaned
forward, picked up the key and tossed it underhand to the guard at the door. The guard
caught it and Pablo smiled at him. Then the guard put the key in the door, turned it, and
pulled the door toward him, ducking behind it as the mob rushed in.
“I saw them come in and just then the drunkard on the chair with me commenced to
shout ‘Ayee! Ayee! Ayee!’ and pushed his head forward so I could not see and then he
shouted ‘Kill them! Kill them! Club them! Kill them!’ and he pushed me aside with his two
arms and I could see nothing.
“I hit my elbow into his belly and I said, ‘Drunkard, whose chair is this? Let me see.’
“But he just kept shaking his hands and arms against the bars and shouting, ‘Kill them!
Club them! Club them! that’s it. Club them! Kill them! Cabrones!Cabrones!Cabrones!’
“I hit him hard with my elbow and said, ‘Cabron! Drunkard! Let me see.’
“Then he put both his hands on my head to push me down and so he might see better
and leaned all his weight on my head and went on shouting, ‘Club them! that’s it. Club
them!’
“‘Club yourself,’ I said and I hit him hard where it would hurt him and it hurt him and he
dropped his hands from my head and grabbed himself and said. ‘No hay derecho,
mujer. This, woman, you have no right to do.’ And in that moment, looking through the
bars, I saw the hail full of men flailing away with clubs and striking with flails, and poking
and striking and pushing and heaving against people with the white wooden pitchforks“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 70
that now were red and with their tines broken, and this was going on all over the room
while Pablo sat in the big chair with his shotgun on his knees, watching, and they were
shouting and clubbing and stabbing and men were screaming as horses scream in a
fire. And I saw the priest with his skirts tucked up scrambling over a bench and those
after him were chopping at him with the sickles and the reaping hooks and then some
one had hold of his robe and there was another scream and another scream and I saw
two men chopping into his back with sickles while a third man held the skirt of his robe
and the Priest’s arms were up and he was clinging to the back of a chair and then the
chair I was standing on broke and the drunkard and I were on the pavement that
smelled of spilled wine and vomit and the drunkard was shaking his finger at me and
saying, ‘No hay derecho, mujer, no hay derecho. You could have done me an injury,’
and the people were trampling over us to get into the hall of the Ayuntamiento and all I
could see was legs of people going in the doorway and the drunkard sitting there facing
me and holding himself where I had hit him.
“That was the end of the killing of the fascists in our town and I was glad I did not see
more of it and, but for that drunkard, I would have seen it all. So he served some good
because in the Ayuntamiento it was a thing one is sorry to have seen.
“But the other drunkard was something rarer still. As we got up after the breaking of
the chair, and the people were still crowding into the Ayuntamiento, I saw this drunkard
of the square with his red-and-black scarf, again pouring something over Don Anastasio.
He was shaking his head from side to side and it was very hard for him to sit up, but he
was pouring and lighting matches and then pouring and lighting matches and I walked
over to him and said, ‘What are you doing, shameless?’
“‘Nada, mujer, nada,’ he said. ‘Let me alone.’
“And perhaps because I was standing there so that my legs made a shelter from the
wind, the match caught and a blue flame began to run up the shoulder of the coat of
Don Anastasio and onto the back of his neck and the drunkard put his head up and
shouted in a huge voice, ‘They’re burning the dead! They’re burning the dead!’
“‘Who?’ somebody said.
“‘Where?’ shouted some one else.
“‘Here,’ bellowed the drunkard. ‘Exactly here!’
“Then some one hit the drunkard a great blow alongside the head with a flail and he
fell back, and lying on the ground, he looked up at the man who had hit him and then
shut his eyes and crossed his hands on his chest, and lay there beside Don Anastasio
as though he were asleep. The man did not hit him again and he lay there and he was
still there when they picked up Don Anastasio and put him with the others in the cart that
hauled them all over to the cliff where they were thrown over that evening with the
others after there had been a cleaning up in the Ayuntamiento. It would have been
better for the town if they had thrown over twenty or thirty of the drunkards, especially
those of the red-and-black scarves, and if we ever have another revolution I believe they
should be destroyed at the start. But then we did not know this. But in the next days we
were to learn.
“But that night we did not know what was to come. After the slaying in the
Ayuntamiento there was no more killing but we could not have a meeting that night
because there were too many drunkards. It was impossible to obtain order and so the
meeting was postponed until the next day.
“That night I slept with Pablo. I should not say this to you, guapa, but on the other
hand, it is good for you to know everything and at least what I tell you is true. Listen to
this, Inglés. It is very curious.
“As I say, that night we ate and it was very curious. It was as after a storm or a flood or
a battle and every one was tired and no one spoke much. I, myself, felt hollow and not
well and I was full of shame and a sense of wrongdoing and I had a great feeling of
oppression and of bad to come, as this morning after the planes. And certainly, bad
came within three days.
“Pablo, when we ate, spoke little.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 71
“‘Did you like it, Pilar?’ he asked finally with his mouth full of roast young goat. We
were eating at the inn from where the buses leave and the room was crowded and
people were singing and there was difficulty serving.
“‘No,’ I said. ‘Except for Don Faustino, I did not like it.’
“‘I liked it,’ he said.
“‘All of it?’ I asked him.
“‘All of it,’ he said and cut himself a big piece of bread with his knife and commenced
to mop up gravy with it. ‘All of it, except the priest.’
“‘You didn’t like it about the priest?’ because I knew he hated priests even worse than
he hated fascists.
“‘He was a disillusionment to me,’ Pablo said sadly.
“So many people were singing that we had to almost shout to hear one another.
“‘Why?’
“‘He died very badly,’ Pablo said. ‘He had very little dignity.’
“‘How did you want him to have dignity when he was being chased by the mob?’ I
said. ‘I thought he had much dignity all the time before. All the dignity that one could
have.’
“‘Yes,’ Pablo said. ‘But in the last minute he was frightened.’
“‘Who wouldn’t be?’ I said. ‘Did you see what they were chasing him with?’
“‘Why would I not see?’ Pablo said. ‘But I find he died badly.’
“‘In such circumstances any one dies badly,’ I told him. ‘What do you want for your
money? Everything that happened in the Ayuntamiento was scabrous.’
“‘Yes,’ said Pablo. ‘There was little organization. But a priest. He has an example to
set.’
“‘I thought you hated priests.’
“‘Yes,’ said Pablo and cut some more bread. ‘But a Spanish priest. A Spanish priest
should die very well.’
“‘I think he died well enough,’ I said. ‘Being deprived of all formality.’
“‘No,’ Pablo said. ‘To me he was a great disillusionment. All day I had waited for the
death of the priest. I had thought he would be the last to enter the lines. I awaited it with
great anticipation. I expected something of a culmination. I had never seen a priest die.’
“‘There is time,’ I said to him sarcastically. ‘Only today did the movement start.’
“‘No,’ he said. ‘I am disillusioned.’
“‘Now,’ I said. ‘I suppose you will lose your faith.’
“‘You do not understand, Pilai’ he said. ‘He was a Spanish priest.’
“‘What people the Spaniards are,’ I said to him. And what a people they are for pride,
eh, Inglés? What a people.”
“We must get on,” Robert Jordan said. He looked at the sun. “It’s nearly noon.”
“Yes,” Pilar said. “We will go now. But let me tell you about Pablo. That night he said
to me, ‘Pilar, tonight we will do nothing.’
“‘Good,’ I told him. ‘That pleases me.’
“‘I think it would be bad taste after the killing of so many people.’
“‘Qué va,’ I told him. ‘What a saint you are. You think I lived years with bullfighters not
to know how they are after the Corrida?’
“‘Is it true, Pilar?’ he asked me.
“‘When did I lie to you?’ I told him.
“‘It is true, Pilar, I am a finished man this night. You do not reproach me?’
“‘No, hombre,’ I said to him. ‘But don’t kill people every day, Pablo.’
“And he slept that night like a baby and I woke him in the morning at daylight but I
could not sleep that night and I got up and sat in a chair and looked out of the window
and I could see the square in the moonlight where the lines had been and across the
square the trees shining in the moonlight, and the darkness of their shadows, and the
benches bright too in the moonlight, and the scattered bottles shining, and beyond the
edge of the cliff where they had all been thrown. And there was no sound but the
splashing of the water in the fountain and I sat there and I thought we have begun badly.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 72
“The window was open and up the square from the Fonda I could hear a woman
crying. I went out on the balcony standing there in my bare feet on the iron and the
moon shone on the faces of all the buildings of the square and the crying was coming
from the balcony of the house of Don Guillermo. It was his wife and she was on the
balcony kneeling and crying.
“Then I went back inside the room and I sat there and I did not wish to think for that
was the worst day of my life until one other day.”
“What was the other?” Maria asked.
“Three days later when the fascists took the town.”
“Do not tell me about it,” said Maria. “I do not want to hear it. This is enough. This was
too much.”
“I told you that you should not have listened,” Pilar said. “See. I did not want you to
hear it. Now you will have bad dreams.”
“No,” said Maria. “But I do not want to hear more.”
“I wish you would tell me of it sometime,” Robert Jordan said.
“I will,” Pilar said. “But it is bad for Maria.”
“I don’t want to hear it,” Maria said pitifully. “Please, Pilar. And do not tell it if I am
there, for I might listen in spite of myself.”
Her lips were working and Robert Jordan thought she would cry.
“Please, Pilar, do not tell it.”
“Do not worry, little cropped head,” Pilar said. “Do not worry. But I will tell the Inglés
sometime.”
“But I want to be there when he is there,” Maria said. “Oh, Pilar, do not tell it at all.”
“I will tell it when thou art working.”
“No. No. Please. Let us not tell it at all,” Maria said.
“It is only fair to tell it since I have told what we did,” Pilar said. “But you shall never
hear it.”
“Are there no pleasant things to speak of?” Maria said. “Do we have to talk always of
horrors?”
“This afternoon,” Pilar said, “thou and Inglés. The two of you can speak of what you
wish.”
“Then that the afternoon should come,” Maria said. “That it should come flying.”
“It will come,” Pilar told her. “It will come flying and go the same way and tomorrow will
fly, too.”
“This afternoon,” Maria said. “This afternoon. That this afternoon should come.”
11
As they came up, still deep in the shadow of the pines, after dropping down from the
high meadow into the wooden valley and climbing up it on a trail that paralleled the
stream and then left it to gain, steeply, the top of a rim-rock formation, a man with a
carbine stepped out from behind a tree.
“Halt,” he said. Then, “Hola, Pilar. Who is this with thee?”
“An Inglés,” Pilar said. “But with a Christian name—Roberto. And what an obscenity of
steepness it is to arrive here.”
“Salud, Camarada,” the guard said to Robert Jordan and put out his hand. “Are you
well?”
“Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “And thee?”
“Equally,” the guard said. He was very young, with a light build, thin, rather hawk-
nosed face, high cheekbones and gray eyes. He wore no hat, his hair was black and
shaggy and his handclasp was strong and friendly. His eyes were friendly too.
“Hello, Maria,” he said to the girl. “You did not tire yourself?”
“Qué va, Joaquín,” the girl said. “We have sat and talked more than we have walked.”
“Are you the dynamiter?” Joaquín asked. “We have heard you were here.”
“We passed the night at Pablo’s,” Robert Jordan said. “Yes, I am the dynamiter.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 73
“We are glad to see you,” Joaquín said. “Is it for a train?”
“Were you at the last train?” Robert Jordan asked and smiled.
“Was I not,” Joaquín said. “That’s where we got this,” he grinned at Maria. “You are
pretty now,” he said to Maria. “Have they told thee how pretty?”
“Shut up, Joaquín, and thank you very much,” Maria said. “You’d be pretty with a
haircut.”
“I carried thee,” Joaquín told the girl. “I carried thee over my shoulder.”
“As did many others,” Pilar said in the deep voice. “Who didn’t carry her? Where is the
old man?”
“At the camp.”
“Where was he last night?”
“In Segovia.”
“Did he bring news?”
“Yes,” Joaquín said, “there is news.”
“Good or bad?”
“I believe bad.”
“Did you see the planes?”
“Ay,” said Joaquín and shook his head. “Don’t talk to me of that. Comrade Dynamiter,
what planes were those?”
“Heinkel one eleven bombers. Heinkel and Fiat pursuit,” Robert Jordan told him.
“What were the big ones with the low wings?”
“Heinkel one elevens.”
“By any names they are as bad,” Joaquín said. “But I am delaying you. I will take you
to the commander.”
“The commander?” Pilar asked.
Joaquín nodded seriously. “I like it better than ‘chief,” he said. “It is more military.”
“You are militarizing heavily,” Pilar said and laughed at him.
“No,” Joaquín said. “But I like military terms because it makes orders clearer and for
better discipline.”
“Here is one according to thy taste, Inglés,” Pilar said. “A very serious boy.”
“Should I carry thee?” Joaquín asked the girl and put his arm on her shoulder and
smiled in her face.
“Once was enough,” Maria told him. “Thank you just the same.”
“Can you remember it?” Joaquín asked her.
“I can remember being carried,” Maria said. “By you, no. I remember the gypsy
because he dropped me so many times. But I thank thee, Joaquín, and I’ll carry thee
sometime.”
“I can remember it well enough,” Joaquín said. “I can remember holding thy two legs
and thy belly was on my shoulder and thy head over my back and thy arms hanging
down against my back.”
“Thou hast much memory,” Maria said and smiled at him. “I remember nothing of that.
Neither thy arms nor thy shoulders nor thy back.”
“Do you want to know something?” Joaquín asked her.
“What is it?”
“I was glad thou wert hanging over my back when the shots were coming from behind
us.”
“What a swine,” Maria said. “And was it for this the gypsy too carried me so much?”
“For that and to hold onto thy legs.”
“My heroes,” Maria said. “My saviors.”
“Listen, guapa,” Pilar told her. “This boy carried thee much, and in that moment thy
legs said nothing to any one. In that moment only the bullets talked clearly. And if he
would have dropped thee he could soon have been out of range of the bullets.”
“I have thanked him,” Maria said. “And I will carry him sometime. Allow us to joke. I do
not have to cry, do I, because he carried me?”
“I’d have dropped thee,” Joaquín went on teasing her. “But I was afraid Pilar would“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 74
shoot me.”
“I shoot no one,” Pilar said.
“No hace falta,” Joaquín told her. “You don’t need to. You scare them to death with
your mouth.”
“What a way to speak,” Pilar told him. “And you used to be such a polite little boy.
What did you do before the movement, little boy?”
“Very little,” Joaquín said. “I was sixteen.”
“But what, exactly?”
“A few pairs of shoes from time to time.”
“Make them?”
“No. Shine them.”
“Qué va,” said Pilar. “There is more to it than that.” She looked at his brown face, his
lithe build, his shock of hair, and the quick heel-and-toe way that he walked. “Why did
you fail at it?”
“Fail at what?”
“What? You know what. You’re growing the pigtail now.”
“I guess it was fear,” the boy said.
“You’ve a nice figure,” Pilar told him. “But the face isn’t much. So it was fear, was it?
You were all right at the train.”
“I have no fear of them now,” the boy said. “None. And we have seen much worse
things and more dangerous than the bulls. It is clear no bull is as dangerous as a
machine gun. But if I were in the ring with one now I do not know if I could dominate my
legs.”
“He wanted to be a bullfighter,” Pilar explained to Robert Jordan. “But he was afraid.”
“Do you like the bulls, Comrade Dynamiter?” Joaquín grinned, showing white teeth.
“Very much,” Robert Jordan said. “Very, very much.”
“Have you seen them in Valladolid?” asked Joaquín.
“Yes. In September at the feria.”
“That’s my town,” Joaquín said. “What a fine town but how the buena gente, the good
people of that town, have suffered in this war.” Then, his face grave, “There they shot
my father. My mother. My brother-in-law and now my sister.”
“What barbarians,” Robert Jordan said.
How many times had he heard this? How many times had he watched people say it
with difficulty? How many times had he seen their eyes fill and their throats harden with
the difficulty of saying my father, or my brother, or my mother, or my sister? He could
not remember how many times he had heard them mention their dead in this way.
Nearly always they spoke as this boy did now; suddenly and apropos of the mention of
the town and always you said, “What barbarians.”
You only heard the statement of the loss. You did not see the father fall as Pilar made
him see the fascists die in that story she had told by the stream. You knew the father
died in some courtyard, or against some wall, or in some field or orchard, or at night, in
the lights of a truck, beside some road. You had seen the lights of the car from the hills
and heard the shooting and afterwards you had come down to the road and found the
bodies. You did not see the mother shot, nor the sister, nor the brother. You heard about
it; you heard the shots; and you saw the bodies.
Pilar had made him see it in that town.
If that woman could only write. He would try to write it and if he had luck and could
remember it perhaps he could get it down as she told it. God, how she could tell a story.
She’s better than Quevedo, he thought. He never wrote the death of any Don Faustino
as well as she told it. I wish I could write well enough to write that story, he thought.
What we did. Not what the others did to us. He knew enough about that. He knew plenty
about that behind the lines. But you had to have known the people before. You had to
know what they had been in the village.
Because of our mobility and because we did not have to stay afterwards to take the
punishment we never knew how anything really ended, he thought. You stayed with a“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 75
peasant and his family. You came at night and ate with them. In the day you were
hidden and the next night you were gone. You did your job and cleared out. The next
time you came that way you heard that they had been shot. It was as simple as that.
But you were always gone when it happened. The partizans did their damage and
pulled out. The peasants stayed and took the punishment. I’ve always known about the
other, he thought. What we did to them at the start I’ve always known it and hated it and
I have heard it mentioned shamelessly and shamefully, bragged of, boasted of,
defended, explained and denied. But that damned woman made me see it as though I
had been there.
Well, he thought, it is part of one’s education. It will be quite an education when it’s
finished. You learn in this war if you listen. You most certainly did. He was lucky that he
had lived parts of ten years ifl Spain before the war. They trusted you on the language,
principally. They trusted you on understanding the language completely and speaking it
idiomatically and having a knowledge of the different places. A Spaniard was only really
loyal to his village in the end. First Spain of course, then his own tribe, then his province,
then his village, his family and finally his trade. If you knew Spanish he was prejudiced
in your favor, if you knew his province it was that much better, but if you knew his village
and his trade you were in as far as any foreigner ever could be. He never felt like a
foreigner in Spanish and they did not really treat him like a foreigner most of the time;
only when they turned on you.
Of course they turned on you. They turned on you often but they always turned on
every one. They turned on themselves, too. If you had three together, two would unite
against one, and then the two would start to betray each other. Not always, but often
enough for you to take enough cases and start to draw it as a conclusion.
This was no way to think; but who censored his thinking? Nobody but himself. He
would not think himself into any defeatism. The first thing was to win the war. If we did
not win the war everything was lost. But he noticed, and listened to, and remembered
everything. He was serving in a war and he gave absolute loyalty and as complete a
performance as he could give while he was serving. But nobody owned his mind, nor his
faculties for seeing and hearing, and if he were going to form judgments he would form
them afterwards. And there would be plenty of material to draw them from. There was
plenty already. There was a little too much sometimes.
Look at the Pilar woman, he thought. No matter what comes, if there is time, I must
make her tell me the rest of that story. Look at her walking along with those two kids.
You could not get three better-looking products of Spain than those. She is like a
mountain and the boy and the girl are like young trees. The old trees are all cut down
and the young trees are growing clean like that. In spite of what has happened to the
two of them they look as fresh and clean and new and untouched as though they had
never heard of misfortune. But according to Pilar, Maria has just gotten sound again.
She must have been in an awful shape.
He remembered a Belgian boy in the Eleventh Brigade who had enlisted with five
other boys from his village. It was a village Of about two hundred people and the boy
had never been away froni the village before. When he first saw the boy, out at Hans’
Brigade Staff, the other five from the village had all been killed and the boy was in very
bad shape and they were using him as an orderly to wait on table at the staff. He had a
big, blond, ruddy Flemish face and huge awkward peasant hands and he moved, with
the dishes, as powerfully and awkwardly as a draft horse. But he cried all the time. All
during the meal he cried with no noise at all.
You looked up and there he was, crying. If you asked for the wine, he cried and if you
passed your plate for stew, he cried; turning away his head. Then he would stop; but if
you looked up at him, tears would start coming again. Between courses he cried in the
kitchen. Every one was very gentle with him. But it did no good. He would have to find
out what became of him and whether he ever cleared up and was fit for soldiering again.
Maria was sound enough now. She seemed so anyway. But he was no psychiatrist.
Pilar was the psychiatrist. It probably had been good for them to have been together last“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 76
night. Yes, unless it stopped. It certainly had been good for him. He felt fine today;
sound and good and unworried and happy. The show looked bad enough but he was
awfully lucky, too. He had been in others that announced themselves badly. Announced
themselves; that was thinking in Spanish. Maria was lovely.
Look at her, he said to himself. Look at her.
He looked at her striding happily in the sun; her khaki shirt open at the neck. She
walks like a colt moves, he thought. You do not run onto something like that. Such
things don’t happen. Maybe it never did happen, he thought. Maybe you dreamed it or
made it up and it never did happen. Maybe it is like the dreams you have when some
one you have seen in the cinema comes to your bed at night and is so kind and lovely.
He’d slept with them all that way When he was asleep in bed. He could remember
Garbo still, and Harlow. Yes, Harlow many times. Maybe it was like those dreams.
But he could still remember the time Garbo came to his bed the flight before the attack
at Pozoblanco and she was wearing a soft silky wool sweater when he put his arm
around her and when she leaned forward her hair swept forward and over his face and
she said why had he never told her that he loved her when she had loved him all this
time? She was not shy, nor cold, nor distant. She was just lovely to hold and kind and
lovely and like the old days with Jack Gilbert and it was as true as though it happened
and he loved her much more than Harlow though Garbo was only there once while
Harlow—maybe this was like those dreams.
Maybe it isn’t too, he said to himself. Maybe I could reach over and touch that Maria
now, he said to himself. Maybe you are afraid to he said to himself. Maybe you would
find out that it never happened and it was not true and it was something you made up
like those dreams about the people of the cinema or how all your old girls come back
and sleep in that robe at night on all the bare floors, in the straw of the haybarns, the
stables, the corrales and the cortijos, the woods, the garages, the trucks and all the hills
of Spain. They all came to that robe when he was asleep and they were all much nicer
than they ever had been in life. Maybe it was like that. Maybe you would be afraid to
touch her to see if it was true. Maybe you would, and probably it is something that you
made up or that you dreamed.
He took a step across the trail and put his hand on the girl’s arm. Under his fingers he
felt the smoothness of her arm in the worn khaki. She looked at him and smiled.
“Hello, Maria,” he said.
“Hello, Inglés,” she answered and he saw her tawny brown face and the yellow-gray
eyes and the full lips smiling and the cropped sun-burned hair and she lifted her face at
him and smiled in his eyes. It was true all right.
Now they were in sight of El Sordo’s camp in the last of the pines, where there was a
rounded gulch-head shaped like an upturned basin. All these limestone upper basins
must be full of caves, he thought. There are two caves there ahead. The scrub pines
growing in the rock hide them well. This is as good or a better place than Pablo’s.
“How was this shooting of thy family?” Pilar was saying to Joaquín.
“Nothing, woman,” Joaquín said. “They were of the left as many others in Valladolid.
When the fascists purified the town they shot first the father. He had voted Socialist.
Then they shot the mother. She had voted the same. It was the first time she had ever
voted. After that they shot the husband of one of the sisters. He was a member of the
syndicate of tramway drivers. Clearly he could not drive a tram without belonging to the
syndicate. But he was without politics. I knew him well. He was even a little hit
shameless. I do not think he was even a good comrade. Then the husband of the other
girl, the other sister, who was also in the trams, had gone to the hills as I had. They
thought she knew where he was. But she did not. So they shot her because she would
not tell them where he was.”
“What barbarians,” said Pilar. “Where is El Sordo? I do not see him.”
“He is here. He is probably inside,” answered Joaquín and stopping now, and resting
the rifle butt on the ground, said, “Pilar, listen to me. And thou, Maria. Forgive me if I
have molested you speaking of things of the family. I know that all have the same“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 77
troubles and it is more valuable not to speak of them.”
“That you should speak,” Pilar said. “For what are we born if not to aid one another?
And to listen and say nothing is a cold enough aid.”
“But it can molest the Maria. She has too many things of her own.”
“Qué va,” Maria said. “Mine are such a big bucket that yours falling in will never fill it. I
am sorry, Joaquín, and I hope thy sister is well.”
“So far she’s all right,” Joaquín said. “They have her in prison and it seems they do not
mistreat her much.”
“Are there others in the family?” Robert Jordan asked.
“No,” the boy said. “Me. Nothing more. Except the brother-inlaw who went to the hills
and I think he is dead.”
“Maybe he is all right,” Maria said. “Maybe he is with a band in other mountains.”
“For me he is dead,” Joaquín said. “He was never too good at getting about and he
was conductor of a tram and that is not the best preparation for the hills. I doubt if he
could last a year. He was Somewhat weak in the chest too.”
“But he may be all right,” Maria put her arm on his shoulder.
“Certainly, girl. Why not?” said Joaquín.
As the boy stood there, Maria reached up, put her arms around his neck and kissed
him. Joaquín turned his head away because he was crying.
“That is as a brother,” Maria said to him. “I kiss thee as a brother.”
The boy shook his head, crying without making any noise.
“I am thy sister,” Maria said. “And I love thee and thou hast a family. We are all thy
family.”
“Including the Inglés,” boomed Pilar. “Isn’t it true, Inglés?”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said to the boy, “we are all thy family, Joaquín.”
“He’s your brother,” Pilar said. “Hey Inglés? ”
Robert Jordan put his arm around the boy’s shoulder. “We are all brothers,” he said.
The boy shook his head.
“I am ashamed to have spoken,” he said. “To speak of such things makes it more
difficult for all. I am ashamed of molesting you.”
“I obscenity in the milk of my shame,” Pilar said in her deep lovely voice. “And if the
Maria kisses thee again I will commence kissing thee myself. It’s years since I’ve kissed
a bullfighter, even an unsuccessful one like thee, I would like to kiss an unsuccessful
bullfighter turned Communist. Hold him, Inglés, till I get a good kiss at him.”
“Deja,” the boy said and turned away sharply. “Leave me alone. I am all right and I am
ashamed.”
He stood there, getting his face under control. Maria put her hand in Robert Jordan’s.
Pilar stood with her hands on her hips looking at the boy mockingly now.
“When I kiss thee,” she said to him, “it will not be as any sister. This trick of kissing as
a sister.”
“It is not necessary to joke,” the boy said. “I told you I am all right, I am sorry that I
spoke.”
“Well then let us go and see the old man,” Pilar said. “I tire myself with such emotion.”
The boy looked at her. From his eyes you could see he was suddenly very hurt.
“Not thy emotion,” Pilar said to him. “Mine. What a tender thing thou art for a
bullfighter.”
“I was a failure,” Joaquín said. “You don’t have to keep insisting on it.”
“But you are growing the pigtail another time.”
“Yes, and why not? Fighting stock serves best for that purpose economically. It gives
employment to many and the State will control it. And perhaps now I would not be
afraid.”
“Perhaps not,” Pilar said. “Perhaps not.”
“Why do you speak in such a brutal manner, Pilar?” Maria said to her. “I love thee very
much but thou art acting very barbarous.”
“It is possible that I am barbarous,” Pilar said. “Listen, Inglés. Do you know what you“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 78
are going to say to El Sordo?”
“Yes.”
“Because he is a man of few words unlike me and thee and this sentimental
menagerie.”
“Why do you talk thus?” Maria asked again, angrily.
“I don’t know,” said Pilar as she strode along. “Why do you think?”
“I do not know.”
“At times many things tire me,” Pilar said angrily. “You understand? And one of them
is to have forty-eight years. You hear me? Forty-eight years and an ugly face. And
another is to see panic in the face of a failed bullfighter of Communist tendencies when I
say, as a joke, I might kiss him.”
“It’s not true, Pilar,” the boy said. “You did not see that.”
“Qué va, it’s not true. And I obscenity in the milk of all of you. Ah, there he is. Hola,
Santiago! Qué tal?”
The man to whom Pilar spoke was short and heavy, brownfaced, with broad
cheekbones; gray haired, with wide-set yellowbrown eyes, a thin-bridged, hooked nose
like an Indian’s, a long Upper lip and a wide, thin mouth. He was clean shaven and he
walked toward them from the mouth of the cave, moving with the bow-legged walk that
went with his cattle herdsman’s breeches and boots. The day was warm but he had on a
sheep’s-wool-lined short leather jacket buttoned up to the neck. He put out a big brown
hand toPilar. “Hola, woman,” he said. “Hola,” he said to Robert Jordan and shook his
hand and looked him keenly in the face. Robert Jordan saw his eyes were yellow as a
cat’s and flat as reptile’s eyes are. “Guapa,” he said to Maria and patted her shoulder.
“Eaten?” he asked Pilar. She shook her head.
“Eat,” he said and looked at Robert Jordan. “Drink?” he asked, making a motion with
his hand decanting his thumb downward.
“Yes, thanks.”
“Good,” El Sordo said. “Whiskey?”
“You have whiskey?”
El Sordo nodded. “Inglés?” he asked. “Not Ruso?”
“Americano.”
“Few Americans here,” he said.
“Now more.”
“Less bad. North or South?”
“North.”
“Same as Inglés. When blow bridge?”
“You know about the bridge?”
El Sordo nodded.
“Day after tomorrow morning.”
“Good,” said El Sordo.
“Pablo?” he asked Pilar.
She shook her head. El Sordo grinned.
“Go away,” he said to Maria and grinned again. “Come back,” he looked at a large
watch he pulled out on a leather thong from inside his coat. “Half an hour.”
He motioned to them to sit down on a flattened log that served as a bench and looking
at Joaquín, jerked his thumb down the trail in the direction they had come from.
“I’ll walk down with Joaquín and come back,” Maria said.
El Sordo went into the cave and came out with a pinch bottle of Scotch whiskey and
three glasses. The bottle was under one arm, and three glasses were in the hand of that
arm, a finger in each glass, and his other hand was around the neck of an earthenware
jar of water. He put the glasses and the bottle down on the log and set the jug on the
ground.
“No ice,” he said to Robert Jordan and handed him the bottle.
“I don’t want any,” Pilar said and covered her glass with her hand.
“Ice last night on ground,” El Sordo said and grinned. “All melt. Ice up there,” El Sordo“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 79
said and pointed to the snow that showed on the bare crest of the mountains. “Too far.”
Robert Jordan started to pour into El Sordo’s glass but the deaf man shook his head
and made a motion for the other to pour for himself.
Robert Jordan poured a big drink of Scotch into the glass and El Sordo watched him
eagerly and when he had finished, handed him the water jug and Robert Jordan filled
the glass with the cold water that ran in a stream from the earthenware spout as he
tipped up the jug.
El Sordo poured himself half a glassful of whiskey and filled the glass with water.
“Wine?” he asked Pilar.
“No. Water.”
“Take it,” he said. “No good,” he said to Robert Jordan and grinned. “Knew many
English. Always much whiskey.”
“Where?”
“Ranch,” El Sordo said. “Friends of boss.”
“Where do you get the whiskey?”
“What?” he could not hear.
“You have to shout,” Pilar said. “Into the other ear.”
El Sordo pointed to his better ear and grinned.
“Where do you get the whiskey?” Robert Jordan shouted.
“Make it,” El Sordo said and watched Robert Jordan’s hand check on its way to his
mouth with the glass.
“No,” El Sordo said and patted his shoulder. “Joke. Comes from La Granja. Heard last
night comes English dynamiter. Good. Very happy. Get whiskey. For you. You like?”
“Very much,” said Robert Jordan. “It’s very good whiskey.”
“Am contented,” Sordo grinned. “Was bringing tonight with information”
“What information?”
Much troop movement.”
Where?
“Segovia. Planes you saw.”
“Yes.”
“Bad, eh?”
“Bad.”
“Troop movement?”
“Much between Villacastín and Segovia. On Valladolid road. Much between Villacastín
and San Rafael. Much. Much.”
“What do you think?”
“We prepare something?”
“Possibly.”
“They know. Prepare too.”
“It is possible.”
“Why not blow bridge tonight?”
“Orders.”
“Whose orders?”
“General Staff.”
“So.”
“Is the time of the blowing important?” Pilar asked.
“Of all importance.”
“But if they are moving up troops?”
“I will send Anselmo with a report of all movement and concentrations. He is checking
the road.”
“You have some one at road?” Sordo asked.
Robert Jordan did not know how much he had heard. You never know with a deaf
man.
“Yes,” he said.
“Me, too. Why not blow bridge now?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 80
“I have my orders.”
“I don’t like it,” El Sordo said. “This I do not like.”
“Nor I,” said Robert Jordan.
El Sordo shook his head and took a sip of the whiskey. “You want of me?”
“How many men have you?”
“Eight.”
“To cut the telephone, attack the post at the house of the roadmenders, take it, and fall
back on the bridge.”
“It is easy.”
“It will all be written out.”
“Don’t trouble. And Pablo?”
“Will cut the telephone below, attack the post at the sawmill, take it and fall back on
the bridge.”
“And afterwards for the retreat?” Pilar asked. “We are seven men, two women and five
horses. You are,” she shouted into Sordo’s ear.
“Eight men and four horses. Faltan caballos,” he said. “Lacks horses.”
“Seventeen people and nine horses,” Pilar said. “Without accounting for transport.”
Sordo said nothing.
“There is no way of getting horses?” Robert Jordan said into Sordo’s best ear.
“In war a year,” Sordo said. “Have four.” He showed four fingers. “Now you want eight
for tomorrow.”
“Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “Knowing you are leaving. Having no need to be careful as
you have been in this neighborhood. Not having to be cautious here now. You could not
cut out and steal eight head of horses?”
“Maybe,” Sordo said. “Maybe none. Maybe more.”
“You have an automatic rifle?” Robert Jordan asked.
Sordo nodded.
“Where?”
“Up the hill.”
“What kind?”
“Don’t know name. With pans.”
“How many rounds?”
“Five pans.”
“Does any one know how to use it?”
“Me. A little. Not shoot too much. Not want make noise here. Not want use cartridges.”
“I will look at it afterwards,” Robert Jordan said. “Have you hand grenades?”
Plenty.
“How many rounds per rifle?”
“Plenty.”
“How many?”
“One hundred fifty. More maybe.”
“What about other people?”
“For what?”
“To have sufficient force to take the posts and cover the bridge While I am blowing it.
We should have double what we have.”
“Take posts don’t worry. What time day?”
“Daylight.”
“Don’t worry.”
“I could use twenty more men, to be sure,” Robert Jordan said.
“Good ones do not exist. You want undependables?”
“No. How many good ones?”
“Maybe four.”
“Why so few?”
“No trust.”
“For horseholders?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 81
“Must trust much to be horseholders.”
“I’d like ten more good men if I could get them.”
“Four.”
“Anselmo told me there were over a hundred here in these hills.”
“No good.”
“You said thirty,” Robert Jordan said to Pilar. “Thirty of a certain degree of
dependability.”
“What about the people of Elias?” Pilar shouted to Sordo. He shook his head.
“No good.”
“You can’t get ten?” Robert Jordan asked. Sordo looked at him with his flat, yellow
eyes and shook his head.
“Four,” he said and held up four fingers.
“Yours are good?” Robert Jordan asked, regretting it as he said it.
Sordo nodded.
“Dentro de la gravedad,” he said in Spanish. “Within the limits of the danger.” He
grinned. “Will be bad, eh?”
“Possibly.”
“Is the same to me,” Sordo said simply and not boasting. “Better four good than much
bad. In this war always much bad, very little good. Every day fewer good. And Pablo?”
he looked at Pilar.
“As you know,” Pilar said. “Worse every day.”
Sordo shrugged his shoulders.
“Take drink,” Sordo said to Robert Jordan. “I bring mine and four more. Makes twelve.
Tonight we discuss all. I have sixty sticks dynamite. You want?”
“What per cent?”
“Don’t know. Common dynamite. I bring.”
“We’ll blow the small bridge above with that,” Robert Jordan said. “That is fine. You’ll
come down tonight? Bring that, will you? I’ve no orders for that but it should be blown.”
“I come tonight. Then hunt horses.”
“What chance for horses?”
“Maybe. Now eat.”
Does he talk that way to every one? Robert Jordan thought. Or is that his idea of how
to make foreigners understand?
“And where are we going to go when this is done?” Pilar shouted into Sordo’s ear.
He shrugged his shoulders.
“All that must be arranged,” the woman said.
“Of course,” said Sordo. “Why not?”
“It is bad enough,” Pilar said. “It must be planned very well.”
“Yes, woman,” Sordo said. “What has thee worried?”
“Everything,” Pilar shouted.
Sordo grinned at her.
“You’ve been going about with Pablo,” he said.
So he does only speak that pidgin Spanish for foreigners, Robert Jordan thought.
Good. I’m glad to hear him talking straight.
“Where do you think we should go?” Pilar asked.
“Where?”
“Yes, where?”
“There are many places,” Sordo said. “Many places. You know Gredos?”
“There are many people there. All these places will be cleaned up as soon as they
have time.”
“Yes. But it is a big country and very wild.”
“It would be very difficult to get there,” Pilar said.
“Everything is difficult,” El Sordo said. “We can get to Gredos as well as to anywhere
else. Travelling at night. Here it is very dangerous now. It is a miracle we have been
here this long. Gredos is safer country than this.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 82
“Do you know where I want to go?” Pilar asked him.
“Where? The Paramera? That’s no good.”
“No,” Pilar said. “Not the Sierra de Paramera. I want to go to the Republic.”
“That is possible.”
“Would your people go?”
“Yes. If I say to.”
“Of mine, I do not know,” Pilar said. “Pablo would not want to although, truly, he might
feel safer there. He is too old to have to go for a soldier unless they call more classes.
The gypsy will not wish to go. I do not know about the others.”
“Because nothing passes her for so long they do not realize the danger,” El Sordo
said.
“Since the planes today they will see it more,” Robert Jordan said. “But I should think
you could operate very well from the Gredos.”
“What?” El Sordo said and looked at him with his eyes very flat. There was no
friendliness in the way he asked the question.
“You could raid more effectively from there,” Robert Jordan said.
“So,” El Sordo said. “You know Gredos?”
“Yes. You could operate against the main line of the railway from there. You could
keep cutting it as we are doing farther south in Estremadura. To operate from there
would be better than returning to the Republic,” Robert Jordan said. “You are more
useful there.”
They had both gotten sullen as he talked.
Sordo looked at Pilar and she looked back at him.
“You know Gredos?” Sordo asked. “Truly?”
“Sure,” said Robert Jordan.
“Where would you go?”
“Above Barco de Avila. Better places than here. Raid against the main road and the
railroad between Béjar and Plasencia.”
“Very difficult,” Sordo said.
“We have worked against that same railroad in much more dangerous country in
Estremadura,” Robert Jordan said.
“Who is we?”
“The guerrilleros group of Estremadura.”
“You are many?”
“About forty.”
“Was the one with the bad nerves and the strange name from there?” asked Pilar.
“Yes.”
“Where is he now?”
“Dead, as I told you.”
“You are from there, too?”
“Yes.”
“You see what I mean?” Pilar said to him.
And I have made a mistake, Robert Jordan thought to himself. I have told Spaniards
we can do something better than they can when the rule is never to speak of your own
exploits or abilities. When I should have flattered them I have told them what I think they
should do and now they are furious. Well, they will either get over it or they will not. They
are certainly much more useful in the Gredos than here. The proof is that here they
have done nothing since the train that Kashkin organized. It was not much of a show. It
cost the fascists one engine and killed a few troops but they all talk as though it were the
high point of the war. Maybe they will shame into going to the Gredos. Yes and maybe I
will get thrown out of here too. Well, it is not a very rosy-looking dish anyway that you
look into it.
“Listen Inglés,” Pilar said to him. “How are your nerves?”
“All right,” said Robert Jordan. “O.K.”
“Because the last dynamiter they sent to work with us, although a formidable“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 83
technician, was very nervous.”
“We have nervous ones,” Robert Jordan said.
“I do not say that he was a coward because he comported himself very well,” Pilar
went on. “But he spoke in a very rare and windy way.” She raised her voice. “Isn’t it true,
Santiago, that the last dynamiter, he of the train, was a little rare?”
“Algo raro,” the deaf man nodded and his eyes went over Robert Jordan’s face in a
way that reminded him of the round opening at the end of the wand of a vacuum
cleaner. “Si, algo raro, pero bueno.”
“Murió,” Robert Jordan said into the deaf man’s ear. “He is dead.”
“How was that?” the deaf man asked, dropping his eyes down from Robert Jordan’s
eyes to his lips.
“I shot him,” Robert Jordan said. “He was too badly wounded to travel and I shot him.”
“He was always talking of such a necessity,” Pilar said. “It was his obsession.”
“Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “He was always talking of such a necessity and it was his
obsession.”
“Como fué?” the deaf man asked. “Was it a train?”
“It was returning from a train,” Robert Jordan said. “The train was successful.
Returning in the dark we encountered a fascist patrol and as we ran he was shot high in
the back but without hitting any bone except the shoulder blade. He travelled quite a
long way, but with the wound was unable to travel more. He was unwilling to be left
behind and I shot him.”
“Menos mal,” said El Sordo. “Less bad.”
“Are you sure your nerves are all right?” Pilar said to Robert Jordan.
“Yes,” he told her. “I am sure that my nerves are all right and I think that when we
terminate this of the bridge you would do well to go to the Gredos.”
As he said that, the woman started to curse in a flood of obscene invective that rolled
over and around him like the hot white water splashing down from the sudden eruption
of a geyser.
The deaf man shook his head at Robert Jordan and grinned in delight. He continued
to shake his head happily as Pilar went on vilifying and Robert Jordan knew that it was
all right again now. Finally she stopped cursing, reached for the water jug, tipped it up
and took a drink and said, calmly, “Then just shut up about what we are to do
afterwards, will you, Inglés? You go back to the Republic and you take your piece with
you and leave us others alone here to decide what part of these hills we’ll die in.”
“Live in,” El Sordo said. “Calm thyself, Pilar.”
“Live in and die in,” Pilar said. “I can see the end of it well enough. I like thee, Inglés,
but keep thy mouth off of what we must do when thy business is finished.”
“It is thy business,” Robert Jordan said. “I do not put my hand in it.”
“But you did,” Pilar said. “Take thy little cropped-headed whore and go back to the
Republic but do not shut the door on others who are not foreigners and who loved the
Republic when thou wert wiping thy mother’s milk off thy chin.”
Maria had come up the trail while they were talking and she heard this last sentence
which Pilar, raising her voice again, shouted at Robert Jordan. Maria shook her head at
Robert Jordan violently and shook her finger warningly. Pilar saw Robert Jordan looking
at the girl and saw him smile and she turned and said, “Yes. I said whore and I mean it.
And I suppose that you’ll go to Valencia together and we can eat goat crut in Gredos.”
“I’m a whore if thee wishes, Pilar,” Maria said. “I suppose I am in all case if you say so.
But calm thyself. What passes with thee?”
“Nothing,” Pilar said and sat down on the bench, her voice calm now and all the
metallic rage gone out of it. “I do not call thee that. But I have such a desire to go to the
Republic.”
“We can all go,” Maria said.
“Why not?” Robert Jordan said. “Since thou seemest not to love the Gredos.”
Sordo grinned at him.
“We’ll see,” Pilar said, her rage gone now. “Give me a glass of that rare drink. I have“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 84
worn my throat out with anger. We’ll see. We’ll see what happens.”
“You see, Comrade,” El Sordo explained. “It is the morning that is difficult.” He was not
talking the pidgin Spanish now and he was looking into Robert Jordan’s eyes calmly and
explainingly; not searchingly nor suspiciously, nor with the flat superiority of the old
campaigner that had been in them before. “I understand your needs and I know the
posts must be exterminated and the bridge covered while you do your work. This I
understand perfectly. This is easy to do before daylight or at daylight.”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “Run along a minute, will you?” he said to Maria without
looking at her.
The girl walked away out of hearing and sat down, her hands clasped over her ankles.
“You see,” Sordo said. “In that there is no problem. But to leave afterward and get out
of this country in daylight presents a grave problem”
“Clearly,” said Robert Jordan. “I have thought of it. It is daylight for me also.”
“But you are one,” El Sordo said. “We are various.”
“There is the possibility of returning to the camps and leaving from there at dark,” Pilar
said, putting the glass to her lips and then lowering it.
“That is very dangerous, too,” El Sordo explained. “That is perhaps even more
dangerous.”
“I can see how it would be,” Robert Jordan said.
“To do the bridge in the night would be easy,” El Sordo said. “Since you make the
condition that it must be done at daylight, it brings grave consequences.”
“I know it.”
“You could not do it at night?”
“I would be shot for it.”
“It is very possible we will all be shot for it if you do it in the daytime.”
“For me myself that is less important once the bridge is blown,” Robert Jordan said.
“But I see your viewpoint. You cannot work Out a retreat for daylight?”
“Certainly,” El Sordo said. “We will work out such a retreat. But I explain to you why
one is preoccupied and why one is irritated. You speak of going to Gredos as though it
were a military manceuvre to be accomplished. To arrive at Gredos would be a miracle.”
Robert Jordan said nothing.
“Listen to me,” the deaf man said. “I am speaking much. But it is so we may
understand one another. We exist here by a miracle. By a mixacle of laziness and
stupidity of the fascists which they will remedy in time. Of course we are very careful
and we make no disturbance in these hills.”
“I know.”
“But now, with this, we must go. We must think much about the manner of our going.”
“Clearly.”
“Then,” said El Sordo. “Let us eat now. I have talked much.”
“Never have I heard thee talk so much,” Pilar said. “Is it this?” she held up the glass.
“No,” El Sordo shook his head. “It isn’t whiskey. It is that never have I had so much to
talk of.”
“I appreciate your aid and your loyalty,” Robert Jordan said. “I appreciate the difficulty
caused by the timing of the blowing of the bridge.”
“Don’t talk of that,” El Sordo said. “We are here to do what we can do. But this is
complicated.”
“And on paper very simple,” Robert Jordan grinned. “On paper the bridge is blown at
the moment the attack starts in order that nothing shall come up the road. It is very
simple.”
“That they should let us do something on paper,” El Sordo said. “That we should
conceive and execute something on paper.”
“Paper bleeds little,” Robert Jordan quoted the proverb.
“But it is very useful,” Pilar said. “Es muy util. What I would like to do is use thy orders
for that purpose.”
“Me too,” said Robert Jordan. “But you could never win a war like that.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 85
“No,” the big woman said. “I suppose not. But do you know what I would like?”
“To go to the Republic,” El Sordo said. He had put his good ear close to her as she
spoke. “Ya irás, mujer. Let us win this and it will all be Republic.”
“All right,” Pilar said. “And now, for God’s sake let us eat.”
12
They left El Sordo’s after eating and started down the trail. El Sordo had walked with
them as far as the lower post.
“Salud,” he said. “Until tonight.”
“Salud, Camarada,” Robert Jordan had said to him and the three of them had gone on
down the trail, the deaf man standing looking after them. Maria had turned and waved
her hand at him and El Sordo waved disparagingly with the abrupt, Spanish upward flick
of the forearm as though something were being tossed away which seems the negation
of all salutation which has not to do with business. Through the meal he had never
unbuttoned his sheepskin coat and he had been carefully polite, careful to turn his head
to hear and had returned to speaking his broken Spanish, asking Robert Jordan about
conditions in the Republic politely; but it was obvious he wanted to be rid of them.
As they had left him, Pilar had said to him, “Well, Santiago?”
“Well, nothing, woman,” the deaf man said. “It is all right. But I am thinking.”
“Me, too,” Pilar had said and now as they walked down the trail, the walking easy and
pleasant down the steep trail through the pines that they had toiled up, Pilar said
nothing. Neither Robert Jordan nor Maria spoke and the three of them travelled along
fast until the trail rose steeply out of the wooded valley to come up through the timber,
leave it, and come out into the high meadow.
It was hot in the late May afternoon and halfway up this last steep grade the woman
stopped. Robert Jordan, stopping and looking back, saw the sweat beading on her
forehead. He thought her brown face looked pallid and the skin sallow and that there
were dark areas under her eyes.
“Let us rest a minute,” he said. “We go too fast.”
“No,” she said. “Let us go on.”
“Rest, Pilar,” Maria said. “You look badly.”
“Shut up,” the woman said. “Nobody asked for thy advice.”
She started on up the trail but at the top she was breathing heavily and her face was
wet with perspiration and there was no doubt about her pallor now.
“Sit down, Pilar,” Maria said. “Please, please sit down.”
“All right,” said Pilar and the three of them sat down under a pine tree and looked
across the mountain meadow to where the tops of the peaks seemed to jut out from the
roll of the high country with snow shining bright on them now in the early afternoon sun.
“What rotten stuff is the snow and how beautiful it looks,” Pilar said. “What an illusion
is the snow.” She turned to Maria. “I am sorry I was rude to thee, guapa. I don’t know
what has held me today. I have an evil temper.”
“I never mind what you say when you are angry,” Maria told her. “And you are angry
often.”
“Nay, it is worse than anger,” Pilar said, looking across at the peaks.
“Thou art not well,” Maria said.
“Neither is it that,” the woman said. “Come here, guapa, and put thy head in my lap.”
Maria moved close to her, put her arms out and folded them as One does who goes to
sleep without a pillow and lay with her head on her arms. She turned her face up at Pilar
and smiled at her but the big woman looked on across the meadow at the mountains.
She stroked the girl’s head without looking down at her and ran a blunt finger across the
girl’s forehead and then around the line of her ear and down the line where the hair grew
on her neck.
“You can have her in a little while, Inglés,” she said. Robert Jordan was sitting behind
her.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 86
“Do not talk like that,” Maria said.
“Yes, he can have thee,” Pilar said and looked at neither of them. “I have never
wanted thee. But I am jealous.”
“Pilar,” Maria said. “Do not talk thus.”
“He can have thee,” Pilar said and ran her finger around the lobe of the girl’s ear. “But
I am very jealous.”
“But Pilar,” Maria said. “It was thee explained to me there was nothing like that
between us.”
“There is always something like that,” the woman said. “There is always something
like something that there should not be. But with me there is not. Truly there is not. I
want thy happiness and nothing more.”
Maria said nothing but lay there, trying to make her head rest lightly.
“Listen, guapa,” said Pilar and ran her finger now absently but tracingly over the
contours of her cheeks. “Listen, guapa, I love thee and he can have thee, I am no
tortillera but a woman made for men. That is true. But now it gives me pleasure to say
thus, in the daytime, that I care for thee.”
“I love thee, too.”
“Qué va. Do not talk nonsense. Thou dost not know even of what I speak.”
“I know.”
“Qué va, that you know. You are for the Inglés. That is seen and as it should be. That I
would have. Anything else I would not have. I do not make perversions. I only tell you
something true. Few people will ever talk to thee truly and no women. I am jealous and
say it and it is there. And I say it.”
“Do not say it,” Maria said. “Do not say it, Pilar.”
“Por qué, do not say it,” the woman said, still not looking at either of them. “I will say it
until it no longer pleases me to say it. And,” she looked down at the girl now, “that time
has come already. I do not say it more, you understand?”
“Pilar,” Maria said. “Do not talk thus.”
“Thou art a very pleasant little rabbit,” Pilar said. “And lift thy head now because this
silliness is over.”
“It was not silly,” said Maria. “And my head is well where it is.”
“Nay. Lift it,” Pilar told her and put her big hands under the girl’s head and raised it.
“And thou, Inglés?” she said, still holding the girl’s head as she looked across at the
mountains. “What cat has eaten thy tongue?”
“No cat,” Robert Jordan said.
“What animal then?” She laid the girl’s head down on the ground.
“No animal,” Robert Jordan told her.
“You swallowed it yourself, eh?”
“I guess so,” Robert Jordan said.
“And did you like the taste?” Pilar turned now and grinned at him.
“Not much.”
“I thought not,” Pilar said. “I thought not. But I give you back our rabbit. Nor ever did I
try to take your rabbit. That’s a good name for her. I heard you call her that this
morning.”
Robert Jordan felt his face redden.
“You are a very hard woman,” he told her.
“No,” Pilar said. “But so simple I am very complicated. Are you very complicated,
Inglés?”
“No. Nor not so simple.”
“You please me, Inglés,” Pilar said. Then she smiled and leaned forward and smiled
and shook her head. “Now if I could take the rabbit from thee and take thee from the
rabbit.”
“You could not.”
“I know it,” Pilar said and smiled again. “Nor would I wish to. But when I was young I
could have.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 87
“I believe it.”
“You believe it?”
“Surely,” Robert Jordan said. “But such talk is nonsense.”
“It is not like thee,” Maria said.
“I am not much like myself today,” Pilar said. “Very little like myself. Thy bridge has
given me a headache, Inglés.”
“We can tell it the Headache Bridge,” Robert Jordan said. “But I will drop it in that
gorge like a broken bird cage.”
“Good,” said Pilar. “Keep on talking like that.”
“I’ll drop it as you break a banana from which you have removed the skin.”
“I could eat a banana now,” said Pilar. “Go on, Inglés. Keep on talking largely.”
“There is no need,” Robert Jordan said. “Let us get to camp.”
“Thy duty,” Pilar said. “It will come quickly enough. I said that I would leave the two of
you.”
“No. I have much to do.”
“That is much too and does not take long.”
“Shut thy mouth, Pilar,” Maria said. “You speak grossly.”
“I am gross,” Pilar said. “But I am also very delicate. Soy muy delicada. I will leave the
two of you. And the talk of jealousness is nonsense. I was angry at Joaquín because I
saw from his look how ugly I am. I am only jealous that you are nineteen. It is not a
jealousy which lasts. You will not be nineteen always. Now I go.”
She stood up and with a hand on one hip looked at Robert Jordan, who was also
standing. Maria sat on the ground under the tree, her head dropped forward.
“Let us all go to camp together,” Robert Jordan said. “It is better and there is much to
do.”
Pilar nodded with her head toward Maria, who sat there, her head turned away from
them, saying nothing.
Pilar smiled and shrugged her shoulders almost imperceptibly and said, “You know
the way?”
“I know it,” Maria said, not raising her head.
“Pues me voy,” Pilar said. “Then I am going. We’ll have something hearty for you to
eat, Inglés.”
She started to walk off into the heather of the meadow toward the stream that led
down through it toward the camp.
“Wait,” Robert Jordan called to her. “It is better that we should all go together.”
Maria sat there and said nothing.
Pilar did not turn.
“Qué va, go together,” she said. “I will see thee at the camp.”
Robert Jordan stood there.
“Is she all right?” he asked Maria. “She looked ill before.”
“Let her go,” Maria said, her head still down.
“I think I should go with her.”
“Let her go,” said Maria. “Let her go!”
They were walking through the heather of the mountain meadow and Robert Jordan
felt the brushing of the heather against his legs, felt the weight of his pistol in its holster
against his thigh, felt the sun on his head, felt the breeze from the snow of the mountain
peaks cool on his back and, in his hand, he felt the girl’s hand firm and strong, the
fingers locked in his. From it, from the palm of her hand against the palm of his, from
their fingers locked together, and from her wrist across his wrist something came from
her hand, her fingers and her wrist to his that was as fresh as the first light air that
moving toward you over the sea barely wrinkles the glassy surface of a calm, as light as
a feather moved across one’s lip, or a leaf falling when there is no breeze; so light that it
could be felt with the touch of their fingers alone, but that was so strengthened, so
intensified, and made so urgent, so aching and so strong by the hard pressure of their
fingers and the close pressed palm and wrist, that it was as though a current moved up“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 88
his arm and filled his whole body with an aching hollowness of wanting. With the sun
shining on her hair, tawny as wheat, and on her gold-brown smooth-lovely face and on
the curve of her throat he bent her head back and held her to him and kissed her. He felt
her trembling as he kissed her and he held the length of her body tight to him and felt
her breasts against his chest through the two khaki shirts, he felt them small and firm
and he reached and undid the buttons on her shirt and bent and kissed her and she
stood shivering, holding her head back, his arm behind her. Then she dropped her chin
to his head and then he felt her hands holding his head and rocking it against her. He
straightened and with his two arms around her held her so tightly that she was lifted off
the ground, tight against him, and he felt her trembling and then her lips were on his
throat, and then he put her down and said, “Maria, oh, my Maria.”
Then he said, “Where should we go?”
She did not say anything but slipped her hand inside of his shirt and he felt her
undoing the shirt buttons and she said, “You, too. I want to kiss, too.”
“No, little rabbit.”
“Yes. Yes. Everything as you.”
“Nay. That is an impossibility.”
“Well, then. Oh, then. Oh, then. Oh.”
Then there was the smell of heather crushed and the roughness of the bent stalks
under her head and the sun bright on her closed eyes and all his life he would
remember the curve of her throat with her head pushed back into the heather roots and
her lips that moved smally and by themselves and the fluttering of the lashes on the
eyes tight closed against the sun and against everything, and for her everything was
red, orange, gold-red from the sun on the closed eyes, and it all was that color, all of it,
the filling, the possessing, the having, all of that color, all in a blindness of that color. For
him it was a dark passage which led to nowhere, then to nowhere, then again to
nowhere, once again to nowhere, always and forever to nowhere, heavy on the elbows
in the earth to nowhere, dark, never any end to nowhere, hung on all time always to
unknowing nowhere, this time and again for always to nowhere, now not to be borne
once again always and to nowhere, now beyond all bearing up, up, up and into
nowhere, suddenly, scaldingly, holdingly all nowhere gone and time absolutely still and
they were both there, time having stopped and he felt the earth move out and away from
under them.
Then he was lying on his side, his head deep in the heather, smelling it and the smell
of the roots and the earth and the sun came through it and it was scratchy on his bare
shoulders and along his flanks and the girl was lying opposite him with her eyes still shut
and then she opened them and smiled at him and he said very tiredly and from a great
but friendly distance, “Hello, rabbit.” And she smiled and from no distance said, “Hello,
my Inglés.”
“I’m not an Inglés,” he said very lazily.
“Oh yes, you are,” she said. “You’re my Inglés,” and reached and took hold of both his
ears and kissed him on the forehead.
“There,” she said. “How is that? Do I kiss thee better?”
Then they were walking along the stream together and he said, “Maria, I love thee and
thou art so lovely and so wonderful and so beautiful and it does such things to me to be
with thee that I feel as though I wanted to die when I am loving thee.”
“Oh,” she said. “I die each time. Do you not die?”
“No. Almost. But did thee feel the earth move?”
“Yes. As I died. Put thy arm around me, please.”
“No. I have thy hand. Thy hand is enough.”
He looked at her and across the meadow where a hawk was hunting and the big
afternoon clouds were coming now over the mountains.
“And it is not thus for thee with others?” Maria asked him, they now walking hand in
hand.
“No. Truly.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 89
“Thou hast loved many others.”
“Some. But not as thee.”
“And it was not thus? Truly?”
“It was a pleasure but it was not thus.”
“And then the earth moved. The earth never moved before?”
“Nay. Truly never.”
“Ay,” she said. “And this we have for one day.”
He said nothing.
“But we have had it now at least,” Maria said. “And do you like me too? Do I please
thee? I will look better later.”
“Thou art very beautiful now.”
“Nay,” she said. “But stroke thy hand across my head.”
He did that feeling her cropped hair soft and flattening and then rising between his
fingers and he put both hands on her head and turned her face up to his and kissed her.
“I like to kiss very much,” she said. “But I do not do it well.”
“Thou hast no need to kiss.”
“Yes, I have. If I am to be thy woman I should please thee in all ways.”
“You please me enough. I would not be more pleased. There is no thing I could do if I
were more pleased.”
“But you will see,” she said very happily. “My hair amuses thee now because it is odd.
But every day it is growing. It will be long and then I will not look ugly and perhaps you
will love me very much.”
“Thou hast a lovely body,” he said. “The loveliest in the world.”
“It is only young and thin.”
“No. In a fine body there is magic. I do not know what makes it in one and not in
another. But thou hast it.”
“For thee,” she said.
“Nay.”
“Yes. For thee and for thee always and only for thee. But it is littie to bring thee. I
would learn to take good care of thee. But tell me truly. Did the earth never move for
thee before?”
“Never,” he said truly.
“Now am I happy,” she said. “Now am I truly happy.
“You are thinking of something else now?” she asked him.
“Yes. My work.”
“I wish we had horses to ride,” Maria said. “In my happiness I would like to be on a
good horse and ride fast with thee riding fast beside me and we would ride faster and
faster, galloping, and never pass my happiness.”
“We could take thy happiness in a plane,” he said absently.
“And go over and over in the sky like the little pursuit planes shining in the sun,” she
said. “Rolling it in loops and in dives. Qué bueno!” she laughed. “My happiness would
not even notice it.”
“Thy happiness has a good stomach,” he said half hearing what she said.
Because now he was not there. He was walking beside her but his mind was thinking
of the problem of the bridge now and it was all clear and hard and sharp as when a
camera lens is brought into focus. He saw the two posts and Anselmo and the gypsy
watching. He saw the road empty and he saw movement on it. He saw where he would
place the two automatic rifles to get the most level field of fire, and who will serve them,
he thought, me at the end, but who at the start? He placed the charges, wedged and
lashed them, sunk his caps and crimped them, ran his wires, hooked them up and got
back to where he had placed the old box of the exploder and then he started to think of
all the things that could have happened and that might go wrong. Stop it, he told himself.
You have made love to this girl and now your head is clear, properly clear, and you start
to worry. It is one thing to think you must do and it is another thing to worry. Don’t worry.
You mustn’t worry. You know the things that you may have to do and you know what“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 90
may happen. Certainly it may happen.
You went into it knowing what you were fighting for. You were fighting against exactly
what you were doing and being forced into doing to have any chance of winning. So
now he was compelled to use these people whom he liked as you should use troops
toward whom you have no feeling at all if you were to be successful. Pablo was
evidently the smartest. He knew how bad it was instantly. The woman was all for it, and
still was; but the realization of what it really consisted in had overcome her steadily and
it had done plenty to her already. Sordo recognized it instantly and would do it but he did
not like it any more than he, Robert Jordan, liked it.
So you say that it is not that which will happen to yourself but that which may happen
to the woman and the girl and to the others that you think of. All right. What would have
happened to them if you had not come? What happened to them and what passed with
them before you were ever here? You must not think in that way. You have no
responsibility for them except in action. The orders do not come from you. They come
from Golz. And who is Golz? A good general. The best you’ve ever served under. But
should a man carry out impossible orders knowing what they lead to? Even though they
come from Golz, who is the party as well as the army? Yes. He should carry them out
because it is only in the performing of them that they can prove to be impossible. How
do you know they are impossible until you have tried them? If every one said orders
were impossible to carry out when they were received where Would you be? Where
would we all be if you just said, “Impossible,” when orders came?
He had seen enough of commanders to whom all orders were impossible. That swine
Gomez in Estremadura. He had seen enough attacks when the flanks did not advance
because it was impossible. No, he would carry out the orders and it was bad luck that
you liked the people you must do it with.
In all the work that they, the partizans, did, they brought added danger and bad luck to
the people that sheltered them and worked with them. For what? So that, eventually,
there should be no more danger and so that the country should be a good place to live
in. That was true no matter how trite it sounded.
If the Republic lost it would be impossible for those who believed in it to live in Spain.
But would it? Yes, he knew that it would be, from the things that happened in the parts
the fascists had already taken.
Pablo was a swine but the others were fine people and was it not a betrayal of them
all to get them to do this? Perhaps it was. But if they did not do it two squadrons of
cavalry would come and hunt them out of these hills in a week.
No. There was nothing to be gained by leaving them alone. Except that all people
should be left alone and you should interfere with no one. So he believed that, did he?
Yes, he believed that. And what about a planned society and the rest of it? That was for
the others to do. He had something else to do after this war. He fought now in this war
because it had started in a country that he loved and he believed in the Republic and
that if it were destroyed life would be unbearable for all those people who believed in it.
He was under Communist discipline for the duration of the war. Here in Spain the
Communists offered the best discipline and the soundest and sanest for the prosecution
of the war. He accepted their discipline for the duration of the war because, in the
conduct of the war, they were the only party whose program and whose discipline he
could respect.
What were his politics then? He had none now, he told himself. But do not tell any one
else that, he thought. Don’t ever admit that. And what are you going to do afterwards? I
am going back and earn my living teaching Spanish as before, and I am going to write a
true book. I’ll bet, he said. I’ll bet that will be easy.
He would have to talk with Pablo about politics. It would certainly be interesting to see
what his political development had been. The classical move from left to right, probably;
like old Lerroux. Pablo was quite a lot like Lerroux. Prieto was as bad. Pablo and Prieto
had about an equal faith in the ultimate victory. They all had the politics of horse thieves.
He believed in the Republic as a form of government but the Republic would have to get“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 91
rid of all of that bunch of horse thieves that brought it to the pass it was in when the
rebellion started. Was there ever a people whose leaders were as truly their enemies as
this one?
Enemies of the people. That was a phrase he might omit. That was a catch phrase he
would skip. That was one thing that sleeping with Maria had done. He had gotten to be
as bigoted and hidebound about his politics as a hard-shelled Baptist and phrases like
enemies of the people came into his mind without his much criticizing them in any way.
Any sort of clichés both revolutionary and patriotic. His mind employed them without
criticism. Of course they were true but it was too easy to be nimble about using them.
But since last night and this afternoon his mind was much clearer and cleaner on that
business. Bigotry is an odd thing. To be bigoted you have to be absolutely sure that you
are right and nothing makes that surety and righteousness like continence. Continence
is the foe of heresy.
How would that premise stand up if he examined it? That was probably why the
Communists were always cracking down on Bohemianism. When you were drunk or
when you committed either fornication or adultery you recognized your own personal
fallibility of that so mutable substitute for the apostles’ creed, the party line. Down with
Bohemianism, the sin of Mayakovsky.
But Mayakovsky was a saint again. That was because he was safely dead. You’ll be
safely dead yourself, he told himself. Now stop thinking that sort of thing. Think about
Maria.
Maria was very hard on his bigotry. So far she had not affected his resolution but he
would much prefer not to die. He would abandon a hero’s or a martyr’s end gladly. He
did not want to make a Thermopylae, nor be Horatius at any bridge, nor be the Dutch
boy With his finger in that dyke. No. He would like to spend some time With Maria. That
was the simplest expression of it. He would like to spend a long, long time with her.
He did not believe there was ever going to be any such thing as a long time any more
but if there ever was such a thing he would like to spend it with her. We could go into the
hotel and register as Doctor and Mrs. Livingstone I presume, he thought.
Why not marry her? Sure, he thought. I will marry her. Then we will be Mt and Mrs.
Robert Jordan of Sun Valley, Idaho. Or Corpus Christi, Texas, or Butte, Montana.
Spanish girls make wonderful wives. I’ve never had one so I know. And when I get my
job back at the university she can be an instructor’s wife and when undergraduates who
take Spanish IV come in to smoke pipes in the evening and have those so valuable
informal discussions about Quevedo, Lope de Vega, Galdós and the other always
admirable dead, Maria can tell them about how some of the blue-shirted crusaders for
the true faith sat on her head while others twisted her arms and pulled her skirts up and
stuffed them in her mouth.
I wonder how they will like Maria in Missoula, Montana? That is if I can get a job back
in Missoula. I suppose that I am ticketed as a Red there now for good and will be on the
general blacklist. Though you never know. You never can tell. They’ve no proof of what
you do, and as a matter of fact they would never believe it if you told them, and my
passport was valid for Spain before they issued the restrictions.
The time for getting back will not be until the fall of thirtyseven. I left in the summer of
thirty-six and though the leave is for a year you do not need to be back until the fall term
opens in the following year. There is a lot of time between now and the fall term. There
is a lot of time between now and day after tomorrow if you want to put it that way. No. I
think there is no need to worry about the university. Just you turn up there in the fall and
it will be all right. Just try and turn up there.
But it has been a strange life for a long time now. Damned if it hasn’t. Spain was your
work and your job, so being in Spain was natural and sound. You had worked summers
on engineering projects and in the forest service building roads and in the park and
learned to handle powder, so the demolition was a sound and normal job too. Always a
little hasty, but sound.
Once you accept the idea of demolition as a problem it is only a problem. But there“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 92
was plenty that was not so good that went with it although God knows you took it easily
enough. There was the constant attempt to approximate the conditions of successful
assassination that accompanied the demolition. Did big words make it more defensible?
Did they make killing any more palatable? You took to it a little too readily if you ask me,
he told himself. And what you will be like or just exactly what you will be suited for when
you leave the service of the Republic is, to me, he thought, extremely doubtful. But my
guess is you will get rid of all that by writing about it, he said. Once you write it down it is
all gone. It will be a good book if you can write it. Much better than the other.
But in the meantime all the life you have or ever will have is today, tonight, tomorrow,
today, tonight, tomorrow, over and over again (I hope), he thought and so you had better
take what time there is and be very thankful for it. If the bridge goes bad. It does not look
too good just now.
But Maria has been good. Has she not? Oh, has she not, he thought. Maybe that is
what I am to get now from life. Maybe that is my life and instead of it being threescore
years and ten it is fortyeight hours or just threescore hours and ten or twelve rather.
Twenty-four hours in a day would be threescore and twelve for the three full days.
I suppose it is possible to live as full a life in seventy hours as in seventy years;
granted that your life has been full up to the time that the seventy hours start and that
you have reached a certain age.
What nonsense, he thought. What rot you get to thinking by yourself. That is really
nonsense. And maybe it isn’t nonsense too. Well, we will see. The last time I slept with a
girl was in Madrid. No it wasn’t. It was in the Escorial and, except that I woke in the night
and thought it was some one else and was excited until I realized who it really was, it
was just dragging ashes; except that it was pleasant enough. And the time before that
was in Madrid and except for some lying and pretending I did to myself as to identity
while things were going on, it was the same or something less. So I am no romantic
glorifier of the Spanish Woman nor did I ever think of a casual piece as anything much
other than a casual piece in any country. But when I am with Maria I love her so that I
feel, literally, as though I would die and I never believed in that nor thought that it could
happen.
So if your life trades its seventy years for seventy hours I have that value now and I
am lucky enough to know it. And if there is not any such thing as a long time, nor the
rest of your lives, nor from now on, but there is only now, why then now is the thing to
praise and I am very happy with it. Now, ahora, maintenant, heute. Now, it has a funny
sound to be a whole world and your life. Esta noche, tonight, ce soir, heute abend. Life
and wife, Vie and Mari. No it didn’t work out. The French turned it into husband. There
was now and frau; but that did not prove anything either. Take dead, mort, muerto, and
todt. Todt was the deadest of them all. War, guerre, guerra, and krieg. Krieg was the
most like war, or was it? Or was it only that he knew German the least well? Sweetheart,
chérie, prenda, and schatz. He would trade them all for Maria. There was a name.
Well, they would all be doing it together and it would not be long now. It certainly
looked worse all the time. It was just something that you could not bring off in the
morning. In an impossible situation you hang on until night to get away. You try to last
out until night to get back in. You are all right, maybe, if you can stick it out until dark
and then get in. So what if you start this sticking it out at daylight? How about that? And
that poor bloody Sordo abandoning his pidgin Spanish to explain it to him so carefully.
As though he had not thought about that whenever he had done any particularly bad
thinking ever since Golz had first mentioned it. As though he hadn’t been living with that
like a lump of undigested dough in the pit of his stomach ever since the night before the
night before last.
What a business. You go along your whole life and they seem as though they mean
something and they always end up not meaning anything. There was never any of what
this is. You think that is one thing that you will never have. And then, on a lousy show
like this, co-ordinating two chicken-crut guerilla bands to help you blow a bridge under
impossible conditions, to abort a counteroffensive that will probably already be started,“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 93
you run into a girl like this Maria. Sure. That is what you would do. You ran into her
rather late, that was all.
So a woman like that Pilar practically pushed this girl into your sleeping bag and what
happens? Yes, what happens? What happens? You tell me what happens, please. Yes.
That is just what happens. That is exactly what happens.
Don’t lie to yourself about Pilar pushing her into your sleeping robe and try to make it
nothing or to make it lousy. You were gone when you first saw her. When she first
opened her mouth and spoke to you it was there already and you know it. Since you
have it and you never thought you would have it, there is no sense throwing dirt at it,
when you know what it is and you know it came the first time you looked at her as she
came out bent over carrying that iron cooking platter.
It hit you then and you know it and so why lie about it? You went all strange inside
every time you looked at her and every time she looked at you. So why don’t you admit
it? All right, I’ll admit it. And as for Pilar pushing her onto you, all Pilar did was be an
intelligent woman. She had taken good care of the girl and she saw what was coming
the minute the girl came back into the cave with the cooking dish.
So she made things easier. She made things easier so that there was last night and
this afternoon. She is a damned sight more civilized than you are and she knows what
time is all about. Yes, he said to himself, I think we can admit that she has certain
notions about the value of time. She took a beating and all because she did not want
other people losing what she’d lost and then the idea of admitting it was lost was too big
a thing to swallow. So she took a beating back there on the hill and I guess we did not
make it any easier for her.
Well, so that is what happens and what has happened and you might as well admit it
and now you will never have two whole nights with her. Not a lifetime, not to live
together, not to have what people were always supposed to have, not at all. One night
that is past, once one afternoon, one night to come; maybe. No, sir.
Not time, not happiness, not fun, not children, not a house, not a bathroom, not a
clean pair of pajamas, not the morning paper, not to wake up together, not to wake and
know she’s there and that you’re not alone. No. None of that. But why, when this is all
you are going to get in life of what you want; when you have found it; why not just one
night in a bed with sheets?
You ask for the impossible. You ask for the ruddy impossible. So if you love this girl as
much as you say you do, you had better love her very hard and make up in intensity
what the relation will lack in duration and in continuity. Do you hear that? In the old days
people devoted a lifetime to it. And now when you have found it if you get two nights you
wonder where all the luck came from. Two nights. Two nights to love, honor and
cherish. For better and for worse. In sickness and in death. No that wasn’t it. In sickness
and in health. Till death do us part. In two nights. Much more than likely. Much more
than likely and now lay off that sort of thinking. You can stop that now. That’s not good
for you. Do nothing that is not good for you. Sure that’s it.
This was what Golz had talked about. The longer he was around, the smarter Golz
seemed. So this was what he was asking about; the compensation of irregular service.
Had Golz had this and was it the urgency and the lack of time and the circumstances
that made it? Was this something that happened to every one given comparable
circumstances? And did he only think it was something special because it was
happening to him? Had Golz slept around in a hurry when he was commanding irregular
cavalry in the Red Army and had the combination of the circumstances and the rest of it
made the girls seem the way Maria was?
Probably Golz knew all about this too and wanted to make the point that you must
make your whole life in the two nights that are given to you; that living as we do now you
must concentrate all of that which you should always have into the short time that you
can have it.
It was a good system of belief. But he did not believe that Maria had only been made
by the circumstances. Unless, of course, she is a reaction from her own circumstance“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 94
as well as his. Her one circumstance is not so good, he thought. No, not so good.
If this was how it was then this was how it was. But there was no law that made him
say he liked it. I did not know that I could ever feel what I have felt, he thought. Nor that
this could happen to me. I would like to have it for my whole life. You will, the other part
of him said. You will. You have it now and that is all your whole life is; now. There is
nothing else than now. There is neither yesterday, certainly, nor is there any tomorrow.
How old must you be before you know that? There is only now, and if now is only two
days, then two days is your life and everything in it will be in proportion. This is how you
live a life in two days. And if you stop complaining and asking for what you never will
get, you will have a good life. A good life is not measured by any biblical span.
So now do not worry, take what you have, and do your work and you will have a long
life and a very merry one. Hasn’t it been merry lately? What are you complaining about?
That’s the thing about this sort of work, he told himself, and was very pleased with the
thought, it isn’t so much what you learn as it is the people you meet. He was pleased
then because he was joking and he came back to the girl.
“I love you, rabbit,” he said to the girl. “What was it you were saying?”
“I was saying,” she told him, “that you must not worry about your work because I will
not bother you nor interfere. If there is anything I can do you will tell me.”
“There’s nothing,” he said. “It is really very simple.”
“I will learn from Pilar what I should do to take care of a man well and those things I
will do,” Maria said. “Then, as I learn, I will discover things for myself and other things
you can tell me.”
“There is nothing to do.”
“Qué va, man, there is nothing! Thy sleeping robe, this morning, should have been
shaken and aired and hung somewhere in the sun. Then, before the dew comes, it
should be taken into shelter.”
“Go on, rabbit.”
“Thy socks should be washed and dried. I would see thee had two pair.”
“What else?”
“If thou would show me I would clean and oil thy pistol.”
“Kiss me,” Robert Jordan said.
“Nay, this is serious. Wilt thou show me about the pistol? Pilar has rags and oil. There
is a cleaning rod inside the cave that should fit it.”
“Sure. I’ll show you.”
“Then,” Maria said. “If you will teach me to shoot it either one of us could shoot the
other and himself, or herself, if one were wounded and it were necessary to avoid
capture.”
“Very interesting,” Robert Jordan said. “Do you have many ideas like that?”
“Not many,” Maria said. “But it is a good one. Pilar gave me this and showed me how
to use it,” she opened the breast pocket of her shirt and took out a cut-down leather
holder such as pocket combs are carried in and, removing a wide rubber band that
closed both ends, took out a Gem type, single-edged razor blade. “I keep this always,”
she explained. “Pilar says you must make the cut here just below the ear and draw it
toward here.” She showed him with her finger. “She says there is a big artery there and
that drawing the blade from there you cannot miss it. Also, she says there is no pain and
you must simply press firmly below the ear and draw it downward. She says it is nothing
and that they cannot stop it if it is done.”
“That’s right,” said Robert Jordan. “That’s the carotid artery.”
So she goes around with that all the time, he thought, as a definitely accepted and
properly organized possibility.
“But I would rather have thee shoot me,” Maria said. “Promise if there is ever any need
that thou wilt shoot me.”
“Sure,” Robert Jordan said. “I promise.”
“Thank thee very much,” Maria told him. “I know it is not easy to do.”
“That’s all right,” Robert Jordan said.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 95
You forget all this, he thought. You forget about the beauties of a civil war when you
keep your mind too much on your work. You have forgotten this. Well, you are supposed
to. Kashkin couldn’t forget it and it spoiled his work. Or do you think the old boy had a
hunch? It was very strange because he had experienced absolutely no emotion about
the shooting of Kashkin. He expected that at some time he might have it. But so far
there had been absolutely none.
“But there are other things I can do for thee,” Maria told him, walking close beside him,
now, very serious and womanly.
“Besides shoot me?”
“Yes. I can roll cigarettes for thee when thou hast no more of those with tubes. Pilar
has taught me to roll them very well, tight and neat and not spilling.”
“Excellent,” said Robert Jordan. “Do you lick them yourself?”
“Yes,” the girl said, “and when thou art wounded I will care for thee and dress thy
wound and wash thee and feed thee—”
“Maybe I won’t be wounded,” Robert Jordan said.
“Then when you are sick I will care for thee and make thee soups and clean thee and
do all for thee. And I will read to thee.”
“Maybe I won’t get sick.”
“Then I will bring thee coffee in the morning when thou wakest—”
“Maybe I don’t like coffee,” Robert Jordan told her.
“Nay, but you do,” the girl said happily. “This morning you took two cups.”
“Suppose I get tired of coffee and there’s no need to shoot me and I’m neither
wounded nor sick and I give up smoking and have only one pair of socks and hang up
my robe myself. What then, rabbit?” he patted her on the back. “What then?”
“Then,” said Maria, “I will borrow the scissors of Pilar and cut thy hair.”
“I don’t like to have my hair cut.”
“Neither do I,” said Maria. “And I like thy hair as it is. So. If there is nothing to do for
thee, I will sit by thee and watch thee and in the nights we will make love.”
“Good,” Robert Jordan said. “The last project is very sensible.”
“To me it seems the same,” Maria smiled. “Oh, Inglés,” she said.
“My name is Roberto.”
“Nay. But I call thee Inglés as Pilar does.”
“Still it is Roberto.”
“No,” she told him. “Now for a whole day it is Inglés. And Inglés, can I help thee with
thy work?”
“No. What I do now I do alone and very coldly in my head.”
“Good,” she said. “And when will it be finished?”
“Tonight, with luck.”
“Good,” she said.
Below them was the last woods that led to the camp.
“Who is that?” Robert Jordan asked and pointed.
“Pilar,” the girl said, looking along his arm. “Surely it is Pilar.”
At the lower edge of the meadow where the first trees grew the woman was sitting, her
head on her arms. She looked like a dark bundle from where they stood; black against
the brown of the tree trunk.
“Come on,” Robert Jordan said and started to run toward her through the knee-high
heather. It was heavy and hard to run in and when he had run a little way, he slowed
and walked. He could see the woman’s head was on her folded arms and she looked
broad and black against the tree trunk. He came up to her and said, “Pilar!” sharply.
The woman raised her head and looked up at him.
“Oh,” she said. “You have terminated already?”
“Art thou ill?” he asked and bent down by her.
“Qué va,” she said. “I was asleep.”
“Pilar,” Maria, who had come up, said and kneeled down by her. “How are you? Are
you all right?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 96
“I’m magnificent,” Pilar said but she did not get up. She looked at the two of them.
“Well, Inglés,” she said. “You have been doing manly tricks again?”
“You are all right?” Robert Jordan asked, ignoring the words.
“Why not? I slept. Did you?”
“No.”
“Well,” Pilar said to the girl. “It seems to agree with you.”
Maria blushed and said nothing.
“Leave her alone,” Robert Jordan said.
“No one spoke to thee,” Pilar told him. “Maria,” she said and her voice was hard. The
girl did not look up.
“Maria,” the woman said again. “I said it seems to agree with thee.”
“Oh, leave her alone,” Robert Jordan said again.
“Shut up, you,” Pilar said without looking at him. “Listen, Maria, tell me one thing.”
“No,” Maria said and shook her head.
“Maria,” Pilar said, and her voice was as hard as her face and there was nothing
friendly in her face. “Tell me one thing of thy own volition.”
The girl shook her head.
Robert Jordan was thinking, if I did not have to work with this woman and her drunken
man and her chicken-crut outfit, I would slap her so hard across the face that—.
“Go ahead and tell me,” Pilar said to the girl.
“No,” Maria said. “No.”
“Leave her alone,” Robert Jordan said and his voice did not sound like his own voice.
I’ll slap her anyway and the hell with it, he thought.
Pilar did not even speak to him. It was not like a snake charming a bird, nor a cat with
a bird. There was nothing predatory. Nor was there anything perverted about it. There
was a spreading, though, as a cobra’s hood spreads. He could feel this. He could feel
the menace of the spreading. But the spreading was a domination, not of evil, but of
searching. I wish I did not see this, Robert Jordan thought. But it is not a business for
slapping.
“Maria,” Pilar said. “I will not touch thee. Tell me now of thy own volition.”
“De tu propia voluntad,” the words were in Spanish.
The girl shook her head.
“Maria,” Pilar said. “Now and of thy own volition. You hear me? Anything at all.”
“No,” the girl said softly. “No and no.”
“Now you will tell me,” Pilar told her. “Anything at all. You will see. Now you will tell
me.”
“The earth moved,” Maria said, not looking at the woman. “Truly. It was a thing I
cannot tell thee.”
“So,” Pilar said and her voice was warm and friendly and there was no compulsion in
it. But Robert Jordan noticed there were small drops of perspiration on her forehead and
her lips. “So there was that. So that was it.”
“It is true,” Maria said and bit her lip.
“Of course it is true,” Pilar said kindly. “But do not tell it to your own people for they
never will believe you. You have no Cali blood, Inglés?”
She got to her feet, Robert Jordan helping her up.
“No,” he said. “Not that I know of.”
“Nor has the Maria that she knows of,” Pilar said. “Pues es muy raro. It is very
strange.”
“But it happened, Pilar,” Maria said.
“Cómo que no, hija?” Pilar said. “Why not, daughter? When I was young the earth
moved so that you could feel it all shift in space and were afraid it would go out from
under you. It happened every night.”
“You lie,” Maria said.
“Yes,” Pilar said. “I lie. It never moves more than three times in a lifetime. Did it really
move?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 97
“Yes,” the girl said. “Truly.”
“For you, Inglés?” Pilar looked at Robert Jordan. “Don’t lie.”
“Yes,” he said. “Truly.”
“Good,” said Pilar. “Good. That is something.”
“What do you mean about the three times?” Maria asked. “Why do you say that?”
“Three times,” said Pilar. “Now you’ve had one.”
“Only three times?”
“For most people, never,” Pilar told her. “You are sure it moved?”
“One could have fallen off,” Maria said.
“I guess it moved, then,” Pilar said. “Come, then, and let us get to camp.”
“What’s this nonsense about three times?” Robert Jordan said to the big woman as
they walked through the pines together.
“Nonsense?” she looked at him wryly. “Don’t talk to me of nonsense, little English.”
“Is it a wizardry like the palms of the hands?”
“Nay, it is common and proven knowledge with Gitanos.”
“But we are not Gitanos.”
“Nay. But you have had a little luck. Non-gypsies have a little luck sometimes.”
“You mean it truly about the three times?”
She looked at him again, oddly. “Leave me, Inglés,” she said. “Don’t molest me. You
are too young for me to speak to.”
“But, Pilar,” Maria said.
“Shut up,” Pilar told her. “You have had one and there are two more in the world for
thee.”
“And you?” Robert Jordan asked her.
“Two,” said Pilar and put up two fingers. “Two. And there will never be a third.”
“Why not?” Maria asked.
“Oh, shut up,” Pilar said. “Shut up. Busnes of thy age bore me.”
“Why not a third?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Oh, shut up, will you?” Pilar said. “Shut up!”
All right, Robert Jordan said to himself. Only I am not having any. I’ve known a lot of
gypsies and they are strange enough. But so are we. The difference is we have to make
an honest living. Nobody knows what tribes we came from nor what our tribal
inheritance is nor what the mysteries were in the woods where the people lived that we
came from. All we know is that we do not know. We know nothing about what happens
to us in the nights. When it happens in the day though, it is something. Whatever
happened, happened and now this woman not only has to make the girl say it when she
did not want to; but she has to take it over and make it her own. She has to make it into
a gypsy thing. I thought she took a beating up the hill but she was certainly dominating
just now back there. If it had been evil she should have been shot. But it wasn’t evil. It
was only wanting to keep her hold on life. To keep it through Maria.
When you get through with this war you might take up the study of women, he said to
himself. You could start with Pilar. She has put in a pretty complicated day, if you ask
me. She never brought in the gypsy stuff before. Except the hand, he thought. Yes, of
course the hand. And I don’t think she was faking about the hand. She wouldn’t tell me
what she saw, of course. Whatever she saw she believed in herself. But that proves
nothing.
“Listen, Pilar,” he said to the woman.
Pilar looked at him and smiled.
“What is it?” she asked.
“Don’t be so mysterious,” Robert Jordan said. “These mysteries tire me very much.”
“So?” Pilar said.
“I do not believe in ogres, soothsayers, fortune tellers, or chicken-crut gypsy
witchcraft.”
“Oh,” said Pilar.
“No. And you can leave the girl alone.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 98
“I will leave the girl alone.”
“And leave the mysteries,” Robert Jordan said. “We have enough work and enough
things that will be done without complicating it with chicken-crut. Fewer mysteries and
more work.”
“I see,” said Pilar and nodded her head in agreement. “And listen, Inglés,” she said
and smiled at him. “Did the earth move?”
“Yes, God damn you. It moved.”
Pilar laughed and laughed and stood looking at Robert Jordan laughing.
“Oh, Inglés. Inglés,” she said laughing. “You are very comical. You must do much
work now to regain thy dignity.”
The Hell with you, Robert Jordan thought. But he kept his mouth shut. While they had
spoken the sun had clouded over and as he looked back up toward the mountains the
sky was now heavy and gray.
“Sure,” Pilar said to him, looking at the sky. “It will snow.”
“Now? Almost in June?”
“Why not? These mountains do not know the names of the months. We are in the
moon of May.”
“It can’t be snow,” he said. “It can’t snow.”
“Just the same, Inglés,” she said to him, “it will snow.”
Robert Jordan looked up at the thick gray of the sky with the sun gone faintly yellow,
and now as he watched gone completely and the gray becoming uniform so that it was
soft and heavy; the gray now cutting off the tops of the mountains.
“Yes,” he said. “I guess you are right.”
14
By the time they reached the camp it was snowing and the flakes were dropping
diagonally through the pines. They slanted through the trees, sparse at first and circling
as they fell, and then, as the cold wind came driving down the mountain, they came
whirling and thick and Robert Jordan stood in front of the cave in a rage and watched
them.
“We will have much snow,” Pablo said. His voice was thick and his eyes were red and
bleary.
“Has the gypsy come in?” Robert Jordan asked him.
“No,” Pablo said. “Neither him nor the old man.”
“Will you come with me to the upper post on the road?”
“No,” Pablo said. “I will take no part in this.”
“I will find it myself.”
“In this storm you might miss it,” Pablo said. “I would not go now.”
“It’s just downhill to the road and then follow it up.”
“You could find it. But thy two sentries will be coming up now with the snow and you
would miss them on the way.”
“The old man is waiting for me.”
“Nay. He will come in now with the snow.
Pablo looked at the snow that was blowing fast now past the mouth of the cave and
said, “You do not like the snow, Inglés?”
Robert Jordan swore and Pablo looked at him through his bleary eyes and laughed.
“With this thy offensive goes, Inglés,” he said. “Come into the cave and thy people will
be in directly.”
Inside the cave Maria was busy at the fire and Pilar at the kitchen table. The fire was
smoking but, as the girl worked with it, poking in a stick of wood and then fanning it with
a folded paper, there was a puff and then a flare and the wood was burning, drawing
brightly as the wind sucked a draft out of the hole in the roof.
“And this snow,” Robert Jordan said. “You think there will be much?”
“Much,” Pablo said contentedly. Then called to Pilar, “You don’t like it, woman, either?“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 99
Now that you command you do not like this snow?”
“A mi qué?” Pilar said, over her shoulder. “If it snows it snows.”
“Drink some wine, Inglés,” Pablo said. “I have been drinking all day waiting for the
snow.”
“Give me a cup,” Robert Jordan said.
“To the snow,” Pablo said and touched cups with him. Robert Jordan looked him in the
eyes and clinked his cup. You bleary-eyed murderous sod, he thought. I’d like to clink
this cup against your teeth. Take it easy, he told himself, take it easy.
“It is very beautiful the snow,” Pablo said. “You won’t want to sleep outside with the
snow falling.”
So that’s on your mind too is it? Robert Jordan thought. You’ve a lot of troubles,
haven’t you, Pablo?
“No?” he said, politely.
“No. Very cold,” Pablo said. “Very wet.”
You don’t know why those old eiderdowns cost sixty-five dollars, Robert Jordan
thought. I’d like to have a dollar for every time I’ve slept in that thing in the snow.
“Then I should sleep in here?” he asked politely.
“Yes.”
“Thanks,” Robert Jordan said. “I’ll be sleeping outside.”
“In the snow?”
“Yes” (damn your bloody, red pig-eyes and your swine-bristly swines-end of a face).
“In the snow.” (In the utterly damned, ruinous, unexpected, slutting, defeat-conniving,
bastard-cessery of the snow.)
He went over to where Maria had just put another piece of pine on the fire.
“Very beautiful, the snow,” he said to the girl.
“But it is bad for the work, isn’t it?” she asked him. “Aren’t you worried?”
“Qué va,” he said. “Worrying is no good. When will supper be ready?”
“I thought you would have an appetite,” Pilar said. “Do you want a cut of cheese now?”
“Thanks,” he said and she cut him a slice, reaching up to unhook the big cheese that
hung in a net from the ceiling, drawing a knife across the open end and handing him the
heavy slice. He stood, eating it. It was just a little too goaty to be enjoyable.
“Maria,” Pablo said from the table where he was sitting.
“What?” the girl asked.
“Wipe the table clean, Maria,” Pablo said and grinned at Robert Jordan.
“Wipe thine own spillings,” Pilar said to him. “Wipe first thy chin and thy shirt and then
the table.”
“Maria,” Pablo called.
“Pay no heed to him. He is drunk,” Pilar said.
“Maria,” Pablo called. “It is still snowing and the snow is beautiful.”
He doesn’t know about that robe, Robert Jordan thought. Good old pig-eyes doesn’t
know why I paid the Woods boys sixty-five dollars for that robe. I wish the gypsy would
come in though. As soon as the gypsy comes I’ll go after the old man. I should go now
but it is very possible that I would miss them. I don’t know where he is posted.
“Want to make snowballs?” he said to Pablo. “Want to have a snowball fight?”
“What?” Pablo asked. “What do you propose?”
“Nothing,” Robert Jordan said. “Got your saddles covered up good?”
“Yes.”
Then in English Robert Jordan said, “Going to grain those horses or peg them out and
let them dig for it?”
“What?”
“Nothing. It’s your problem, old pal. I’m going out of here on my feet.”
“Why do you speak in English?” Pablo asked.
“I don’t know,” Robert Jordan said. “When I get very tired sometimes I speak English.
Or when I get very disgusted. Or baffled, say. When I get highly baffled I just talk
English to hear the sound of it. It’s a reassuring noise. You ought to try it sometime.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway100
“What do you say, Inglés?” Pilar said. “It sounds very interesting but I do not
understand.”
“Nothing,” Robert Jordan said. “I said, ‘nothing’ in English.”
“Well then, talk Spanish,” Pilar said. “It’s shorter and simpler in Spanish.”
“Surely,” Robert Jordan said. But oh boy, he thought, oh Pablo, oh Pilar, oh Maria, oh
you two brothers in the corner whose names I’ve forgotten and must remember, but I
get tired of it sometimes. Of it and of you and of me and of the war and why in all why
did it have to snow now? That’s too bloody much. No, it’s not. Nothing is too bloody
much. You just have to take it and fight out of it and now stop prima-donnaing and
accept the fact that it is snowing as you did a moment ago and the next thing is to check
with your gypsy and pick up your old man. But to snow! Now in this month. Cut it out, he
said to himself. Cut it out and take it. It’s that cup, you know. How did it go about that
cup? He’d either have to improve his memory or else never think of quotations because
when you missed one it hung in your mind like a name you had forgotten and you could
not get rid of it. How did it go about that cup?
“Let me have a cup of wine, please,” he said in Spanish. Then, “Lots of snow? Eh?” he
said to Pablo. “Mucha nieve.”
The drunken man looked up at him and grinned. He nodded his head and grinned
again.
“No offensive. No aviones. No bridge. Just snow,” Pablo said.
“You expect it to last a long time?” Robert Jordan sat down by him. “You think we’re
going to be snowed in all summer, Pablo, old boy?”
“All summer, no,” Pablo said. “Tonight and tomorrow, yes.”
“What makes you think so?”
“There are two kinds of storms,” Pablo said, heavily and judiciously. “One comes from
the Pyrenees. With this one there is great cold. It is too late for this one.”
“Good,” Robert Jordan said. “That’s something.”
“This storm comes from the Cantabrico,” Pablo said. “It comes from the sea. With the
wind in this direction there will be a great storm and much snow.”
“Where did you learn all this, old timer?” Robert Jordan asked.
Now that his rage was gone he was excited by this storm as he was always by all
storms. In a blizzard, a gale, a sudden line squall, a tropical storm, or a summer thunder
shower in the mountains there was an excitement that came to him from no other thing.
It was like the excitement of battle except that it was clean. There is a wind that blows
through battle but that was a hot wind; hot and dry as your mouth; and it blew heavily;
hot and dirtily; and it rose and died away with the fortunes of the day. He knew that wind
well.
But a snowstorm was the opposite of all of that. In the snowstorm you came close to
wild animals and they were not afraid. They travelled across country not knowing where
they were and the deer stood sometimes in the lee of the cabin. In a snowstorm you
rode up to a moose and he mistook your horse for another moose and trotted forward to
meet you. In a snowstorm it always seemed, for a time, as though there were no
enemies. In a snowstorm the wind could blow a gale; but it blew a white cleanness and
the air was full of a driving whiteness and all things were changed and when the wind
stopped there would be the stillness. This was a big storm and he might as well enjoy it.
It was ruining everything, but you might as well enjoy it.
“I was an arroyero for many years,” Pablo said. “We trucked freight across the
mountains with the big carts before the camions came into use. In that business we
learned the weather.”
“And how did you get into the movement?”
“I was always of the left,” Pablo said. “We had many contacts with the people of
Asturias where they are much developed politically. I have always been for the
Republic.”
“But what were you doing before the movement?”
“I worked then for a horse contractor of Zaragoza. He furnished horses for the bull“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway101
rings as well as remounts for the army. It was then that I met Pilar who was, as she told
you, with the matador Finito de Palencia.”
He said this with considerable pride.
“He wasn’t much of a matador,” one of the brothers at the table said looking at Pilar’s
back where she stood in front of the stove.
“No?” Pilar said, turning around and looking at the man. “He wasn’t much of a
matador?”
Standing there now in the cave by the cooking fire she could see him, short and brown
and sober-faced, with the sad eyes, the cheeks sunken and the black hair curled wet on
his forehead where the tightfitting matador’s hat had made a red line that no one else
noticed. She saw him stand, now, facing the five-year-old bull, facing the horns that had
lifted the horses high, the great neck thrusting the horse up, up, as that rider poked into
that neck with the spiked pole, thrusting up and up until the horse went over with a crash
and the rider fell against the wooden fence and, with the bull’s legs thrusting him
forward, the big neck swung the horns that searched the horse for the life that was in
him. She saw him, Finito, the not-so-good matador, now standing in front of the bull and
turning sideways toward him. She saw him now clearly as he furled the heavy flannel
cloth around the stick; the flannel hanging blood-heavy from the passes where it had
swept over the bull’s head and shoulders and the wet streaming shine of his withers and
on down and over his back as the bull raised into the air and the banderillas clattered.
She saw Finito stand five paces from the bull’s head, profiled, the bull standing still and
heavy, and draw the sword slowly up until it was level with his shoulder and then sight
along the dipping blade at a point he could not yet see because the bull’s head was
higher than his eyes. He would bring that head down with the sweep his left arm would
make with the wet, heavy cloth; but now he rocked back a little on his heels and sighted
along the blade, profiled in front of the splintered horn; the bull’s chest heaving and his
eyes watching the cloth.
She saw him very clearly now and she heard his thin, clear voice as he turned his
head and looked toward the people in the first row of the ring above the red fence and
said, “Let’s see if we can kill him like this!”
She could hear the voice and then see the first bend of the knee as he started forward
and watch his voyage in onto the horn that lowered now magically as the bull’s muzzle
followed the low swept cloth, the thin, brown wrist controlled, sweeping the horns down
and past, as the sword entered the dusty height of the withers.
She saw its brightness going in slowly and steadily as though the bull’s rush plucked it
into himself and out from the man’s hand and she watched it move in until the brown
knuckles rested against the taut hide and the short, brown man whose eyes had never
left the entry place of the sword now swung his sucked-in belly clear of the horn and
rocked clear from the animal, to stand holding the cloth on the stick in his left hand,
raising his right hand to watch the bull die.
She saw him standing, his eyes watching the bull trying to hold the ground, watching
the bull sway like a tree before it falls, watching the bull fight to hold his feet to the earth,
the short man’s hand raised in a formal gesture of triumph. She saw him standing there
in the sweated, hollow relief of it being over, feeling the relief that the bull was dying,
feeling the relief that there had been no shock, no blow of the horn as he came clear
from it and then, as he stood, the bull could hold to the earth no longer and crashed
over, rolling dead with all four feet in the air, and she could see the short, brown man
walking tired and unsmiling to the fence.
She knew he could not run across the ring if his life depended on it and she watched
him walk slowly to the fence and wipe his mouth on a towel and look up at her and
shake his head and then wipe his face on the towel and start his triumphant circling of
the ring.
She saw him moving slowly, dragging around the ring, smiling, bowing, smiling, his
assistants walking behind him, stooping, picking up cigars, tossing back hats; he circling
the ring sad-eyed and smiling, to end the circle before her. Then she looked over and“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway102
saw him sitting now on the step of the wooden fence, his mouth in a towel.
Pilar saw all this as she stood there over the fire and she said, “So he wasn’t a good
matador? With what class of people is my life passed now!”
“He was a good matador,” Pablo said. “He was handicapped by his short stature.”
“And clearly he was tubercular,” Primitivo said.
“Tubercular?” Pilar said. “Who wouldn’t be tubercular from the punishment he
received? In this country where no poor man can ever hope to make money unless he is
a criminal like Juan March, or a bullfighter, or a tenor in the opera? Why wouldn’t he be
tubercular? In a country where the bourgeoisie over-eat so that their stomachs are all
ruined and they cannot live without bicarbonate of soda and the poor are hungry from
their birth till the day they die, why wouldn’t he be tubercular? If you travelled under the
seats in third-class carriages to ride free when you were following the fairs learning to
fight as a boy, down there in the dust and dirt with the fresh spit and the dry spit,
wouldn’t you be tubercular if your chest was beaten out by horns?”
“Clearly,” Primitivo said. “I only said he was tubercular.”
“Of course he was tubercular,” Pilar said, standing there with the big wooden stirring
spoon in her hand. “He was short of stature and he had a thin voice and much fear of
bulls. Never have I seen a man with more fear before the bullfight and never have I seen
a man with less fear in the ring. “You,” she said to Pablo. “You are afraid to die now.
You think that is something of importance. But Finito was afraid all the time and in the
ring he was like a lion.”
“He had the fame of being very valiant,” the second brother said.
“Never have I known a man with so much fear,” Pilar said. “He would not even have a
bull’s head in the house. One time at the feria of Valladolid he killed a bull of Pablo
Romero very well—”
“I remember,” the first brother said. “I was at the ring. It was a soap-colored one with a
curly forehead and with very high horns. It was a bull of over thirty arrobas. It was the
last bull he killed in Valladolid.”
“Exactly,” Pilar said. “And afterwards the club of enthusiasts who met in the Café
Colon and had taken his name for their club had the head of the bull mounted and
presented it to him at a small banquet at the Café Colon. During the meal they had the
head on the wall, but it was covered with a cloth. I was at the table and others were
there, Pastora, who is uglier than I am, and the Nina de los Peines, and other gypsies
and whores of great category. It was a banquet, small but of great intensity and almost
of a violence due to a dispute between Pastora and one of the most significant whores
over a question of propriety. I, myself, was feeling more than happy and I was sitting by
Finito and I noticed he would not look up at the bull’s head, which was shrouded in a
purple cloth as the images of the saints are covered in church duing the week of the
passion of our former Lord.
“Finito did not eat much because he had received a palotaxo, a blow from the flat of
the horn when he had gone in to kill in his last corrida of the year at Zaragoza, and it
had rendered him unconscious for some time and even now he could not hold food on
his stomach and he would put his handkerchief to his mouth and deposit a quantity of
blood in it at intervals throughout the banquet. What was I going to tell you?”
“The bull’s head,” Primitivo said. “The stuffed head of the bull.”
“Yes,” Pilar said. “Yes. But I must tell certain details so that you will see it. Finito was
never very merry, you know. He was essentially solemn and I had never known him
when we were alone to laugh at anything. Not even at things which were very comic. He
took everything with great seriousness. He was almost as serious as Fernando. But this
was a banquet given him by a club of aficionados banded together into the Club Finito
and it was necessary for him to give an appearance of gaiety and friendliness and
merriment. So all during the meal he smiled and made friendly remarks and it was only I
who noticed what he was doing with the handkerchief. He had three handkerchiefs with
him and he filled the three of them and then he said to me in a very low voice, ‘Pilar, I
can support this no further. I think I must leave.’“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway103
“‘Let us leave then,’ I said. For I saw he was suffering much. There was great hilarity
by this time at the banquet and the noise was tremendous.
“‘No. I cannot leave,’ Finito said to me. ‘After all it is a club flamed for me and I have
an obligation.’
“‘If thou art ill let us go,’ I said.
“‘Nay,’ he said. ‘I will stay. Give me some of that manzanilla.’
“I did not think it was wise of him to drink, since he had eaten nothing, and since he
had such a condition of the stomach; but he was evidently unable to support the
merriment and the hilarity and the noise longer without taking something. So I watched
him drink, very rapidly, almost a bottle of the manzanilla. Having exhausted his
handkerchiefs he was now employing his napkin for the use he had previously made of
his handkerchiefs.
“Now indeed the banquet had reached a stage of great enthusiasm and some of the
least heavy of the whores were being paraded around the table on the shoulders of
various of the club members. Pastora was prevailed upon to sing and El Niño Ricardo
played the guitar and it was very moving and an occasion of true joy and drunken
friendship of the highest order. Never have I seen a banquet at which a higher pitch of
real flamenco enthusiasm was reached and yet we had not arrived at the unveiling of
the bull’s head which was, after all, the reason for the celebration of the banquet.
“I was enjoying myself to such an extent and I was so busy clapping my hands to the
playing of Ricardo and aiding to make up a team to clap for the singing of the Nina de
los Peines that I did not notice that Finito had filled his own napkin by now, and that he
had taken mine. He was drinking more manzanilla now and his eyes were very bright,
and he was nodding very happily to every one. He could not speak much because at
any time, while speaking, he might have to resort to his napkin; but he was giving an
appearance of great gayety and enjoyment which, after all, was what he was there for.
“So the banquet proceeded and the man who sat next to me had been the former
manager of Rafael el Gallo and he was telling me a story, and the end of it was, ‘So
Rafael came to me and said, “You are the best friend I have in the world and the
noblest. I love you like a brother and I wish to make you a present.” So then he gave me
a beautiful diamond stick pin and kissed me on both cheeks and we were both very
moved. Then Rafael el Gallo, having given me the diamond stick pin, walked out of the
café and I said to Retana who was sitting at the table, “That dirty gypsy had just signed
a contract with another manager.”‘
“‘“What do you mean?” Retana asked.’
“‘I’ve managed him for ten years and he has never given me a present before,’ the
manager of El Gallo had said. ‘That’s the only thing it can mean.’ And sure enough it
was true and that was how El Gallo left him.
“But at this point, Pastora intervened in the conversation, not perhaps as much to
defend the good name of Rafael, since no one had ever spoken harder against him than
she had herself, but because the manager had spoken against the gypsies by
employing the phrase, ‘Dirty gypsy.’ She intervened so forcibly and in such terms that
the manager was reduced to silence. I intervened to quiet Pastora and another Gitana
intervened to quiet me and the din was such that no one could distinguish any words
which passed except the one great word ‘whore’ which roared out above all other words
until quiet was restored and the three of us who had intervened sat looking down into
our glasses and then I noticed that Finito was staring at the bull’s head, still draped in
the purple cloth, with a look of horror on his face.
“At this moment the president of the Club commenced the speech which was to
precede the unveiling of the head and all through the speech which was applauded with
shouts of ‘Ole!’ and poundings on the table I was watching Finito who was making use
of his, no, my, napkin and sinking further back in his chair and staring with horror and
fascination at the shrouded bull’s head on the wall opposite him.
“Toward the end of the speech, Finito began to shake his head and he got further
back in the chair all the time.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway104
“‘How are you, little one?’ I said to him but when he looked at me he did not recognize
me and he only shook his head and said, ‘No. No. No.’
“So the president of the Club reached the end of the speech and then, with everybody
cheering him, he stood on a chair and reached up and untied the cord that bound the
purple shroud over the head and slowly pulled it clear of the head and it stuck on one of
the horns and he lifted it clear and pulled it off the sharp polished horns and there was
that great yellow bull with black horns that swung Way out and pointed forward, their
white tips sharp as porcupine quills, and the head of the bull was as though he were
alive; his forehead was curly as in life and his nostrils were open and his eyes were
bright and he was there looking straight at Finito.
“Every one shouted and applauded and Finito sunk further back in the chair and then
every one was quiet and looking at him and he said, ‘No. No,’ and looked at the bull and
pulled further back and then he said, ‘No!’ very loudly and a big blob of blood came out
and he didn’t even put up the napkin and it slid down his chin and he was still looking at
the bull and he said, ‘All season, yes. To make money, yes. To eat, yes. But I can’t eat.
Hear me? My stomach’s bad. But now with the season finished! No! No! No!’ He looked
around at the table and then he looked at the bull’s head and said, ‘No,’ once more and
then he put his head down and he put his napkin up to his mouth and then he just sat
there like that and said nothing and the banquet, which had started so well, and
promised to mark an epoch in hilarity and good fellowship was not a success.”
“Then how long after that did he die?” Primitivo asked.
“That winter,” Pilar said. “He never recovered from that last blow with the flat of the
horn in Zaragoza. They are worse than a goring, for the injury is internal and it does not
heal. He received one almost every time he went in to kill and it was for this reason he
was not more successful. It was difficult for him to get out from over the horn because of
his short stature. Nearly always the side of the horn struck him. But of course many
were only glancing blows.”
“If he was so short he should not have tried to be a matador,” Primitivo said.
Pilar looked at Robert Jordan and shook her head. Then she bent over the big iron
pot, still shaking her head.
What a people they are, she thought. What a people are the Spaniards, “and if he was
so short he should not have tried to be a matador.” And I hear it and say nothing. I have
no rage for that and having made an explanation I am silent. How simple it is when one
knows nothing. Qué sencillo! Knowing nothing one says, “He was not much of a
matador.” Knowing nothing another says, “He was tubercular.” And another says, after
one, knowing, has explained, “If he was so short he should not have tried to be a
matador.”
Now, bending over the fire, she saw on the bed again the naked brown body with the
gnarled scars in both thighs, the deep, seared whorl below the ribs on the right side of
the chest and the long white welt along the side that ended in the armpit. She saw the
eyes closed and the solemn brown face and the curly black hair pushed back now from
the forehead and she was sitting by him on the bed rubbing the legs, chafing the taut
muscles of the calves, kneading them, loosening them, and then tapping them lightly
with her folded hands, loosening the cramped muscles.
“How is it?” she said to him. “How are the legs, little one?”
“Very well, Pilar,” he would say without opening his eyes.
“Do you want me to rub the chest?”
“Nay, Pilar. Please do not touch it.”
“And the upper legs?”
“No. They hurt too badly.”
“But if I rub them and put liniment on, it will warm them and they will be better.”
“Nay, Pilar. Thank thee. I would rather they were not touched.”
“I will wash thee with alcohol.”
“Yes. Do it very lightly.”
“You were enormous in the last bull,” she would say to him and he would say, “Yes, I“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway105
killed him very well.”
Then, having washed him and covered him with a sheet, she would lie by him in the
bed and he would put a brown hand out and touch her and say, “Thou art much woman,
Pilar.” It was the nearest to a joke he ever made and then, usually, after the fight, he
would go to sleep and she would lie there, holding his hand in her two hands and
listening to him breathe.
He was often frightened in his sleep and she would feel his hand grip tightly and see
the sweat bead on his forehead and if he woke, she said, “It’s nothing,” and he slept
again. She was with him thus five years and never was unfaithful to him, that is almost
never, and then after the funeral, she took up with Pablo who led picador horses in the
ring and was like all the bulls that Finito had spent his life killing. But neither bull force
nor bull courage lasted, she knew now, and what did last? I last, she thought. Yes, I
have lasted. But for what?
“Maria,” she said. “Pay some attention to what you are doing. That is a fire to cook
with. Not to burn down a city.”
Just then the gypsy came in the door. He was covered with snow and he stood there
holding his carbine and stamping the snow from his feet.
Robert Jordan stood up and went over to the door, “Well?” he said to the gypsy.
“Six-hour watches, two men at a time on the big bridge,” the gypsy said. “There are
eight men and a corporal at the roadmender’s hut. Here is thy chronometer.”
“What about the sawmill post?”
“The old man is there. He can watch that and the road both.”
“And the road?” Robert Jordan asked.
“The same movement as always,” the gypsy said. “Nothing out of the usual. Several
motor cars.”
The gypsy looked cold, his dark face was drawn with the cold and his hands were red.
Standing in the mouth of the cave he took off his jacket and shook it.
“I stayed until they changed the watch,” he said. “It was changed at noon and at six.
That is a long watch. I am glad I am not in their army.”
“Let us go for the old man,” Robert Jordan said, putting on his leather coat.
“Not me,” the gypsy said. “I go now for the fire and the hot soup. I will tell one of these
where he is and he can guide you. Hey, loafers,” he called to the men who sat at the
table. “Who wants to guide the Inglés to where the old man is watching the road?”
“I will go,” Fernando rose. “Tell me where it is.”
“Listen,” the gypsy said. “It is here—” and he told him where the old man, Anselmo,
was posted.
15
Anselmo was crouched in the lee of the trunk of a big tree and the snow blew past on
either side. He was pressed close against the tree and his hands were inside of the
sleeves of his jacket, each hand shoved up into the opposite sleeve, and his head was
pulled as far down into the jacket as it would go. If I stay here much longer I will freeze,
he thought, and that will be of no value. The Inglés told me to stay until I was relieved
but he did not know then about this storm. There has been no abnormal movement on
the road and I know the dispositions and the habits of this post at the sawmill across the
road. I should go now to the camp. Anybody with sense would be expecting me to return
to the camp. I will stay a little longer, he thought, and then go to the camp. It is the fault
of the orders, which are too rigid. There is no allowance for a change in circumstance.
He rubbed his feet together and then took his hands out of the jacket sleeves and bent
over and rubbed his legs with them and patted his feet together to keep the circulation
going. It was less cold there, out of the wind in the shelter of the tree, but he would have
to start walking shortly.
As he crouched, rubbing his feet, he heard a motorcar on the road. It had on chains
and one link of chain was slapping and, as he Watched, it came up the snow-covered“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway106
road, green and brown painted, in broken patches of daubed color, the windows blued
over so that you could not see in, with only a half circle left clear in the blue for the
occupants to look out through. It was a two-year-old Rolls-Royce town car camouflaged
for the use of the General Staff but Anselmo did not know that. He could not see into the
car where three officers sat wrapped in their capes. Two were on the back seat and one
sat on the folding chair. The officer on the folding chair was looking out of the slit in the
blue of the window as the car passed but Anselmo did not know this. Neither of them
saw the other.
The car passed in the snow directly below him. Anselmo saw the chauffeur, red-faced
and steel-helmeted, his face and helmet projecting out of the blanket cape he wore and
he saw the forward jut of the automatic rifle the orderly who sat beside the chauffeur
carried. Then the car was gone up the road and Anselmo reached into the inside of his
jacket and took out from his shirt pocket the two sheets torn from Robert Jordan’s
notebook and made a mark after the drawing of a motorcar. It was the tenth car up for
the day. Six had come down. Four were still up. It was not an unusual amount of cars to
move upon that road but Anselmo did not distinguish between the Fords, Fiats, Opels,
Renaults, and Citroens of the staff of the Division that held the passes and the line of
the mountain and the Rolls-Royces, Lancias, Mercedes, and Isottas of the General
Staff. This was the sort of distinction that Robert Jordan should have made and, if he
had been there instead of the old man, he would have appreciated the significance of
these cars which had gone up. But he was not there and the old man simply made a
mark for a motorcar going up the road, on the sheet of note paper.
Anselmo was now so cold that he decided he had best go to camp before it was dark.
He had no fear of missing the way, but he thought it was useless to stay longer and the
wind was blowing colder all the time and there was no lessening of the snow. But when
he stood up and stamped his feet and looked through the driving snow at the road he
did not start off up the hillside but stayed leaning against the sheltered side of the pine
tree.
The Inglés told me to stay, he thought. Even now he may be on the way here and, if I
leave this place, he may lose himself in the snow searching for me. All through this war
we have suffered from a lack of discipline and from the disobeying of orders and I will
wait a while still for the Inglés. But if he does not come soon I must go in spite of all
orders for I have a report to make now, and I have much to do in these days, and to
freeze here is an exaggeration and without utility.
Across the road at the sawmill smoke was coming out of the chimney and Anselmo
could smell it blown toward him through the snow. The fascists are warm, he thought,
and they are comfortable, and tomorrow night we will kill them. It is a strange thing and I
do not like to think of it. I have watched them all day and they are the same men that we
are. I believe that I could walk up to the mill and knock on the door and I would be
welcome except that they have orders to challenge all travellers and ask to see their
papers. It is only orders that come between us. Those men are not fascists. I call them
so, but they are not. They are poor men as we are. They should never be fighting
against us and I do not like to think of the killing.
These at this post are Gallegos. I know that from hearing them talk this afternoon.
They cannot desert because if they do their families will be shot. Gallegos are either
very intelligent or very dumb and brutal. I have known both kinds. Lister is a Gallego
from the same town as Franco. I wonder what these Gallegos think of this snow now at
this time of year. They have no high mountains such as these and in their country it
always rains and it is always green.
A light showed in the window of the sawmill and Anselmo shivered and thought, damn
that Inglés! There are the Gallegos warm and in a house here in our country, and I am
freezing behind a tree and we live in a hole in the rocks like beasts in the mountain. But
tomorrow, he thought, the beasts will come out of their hole and these that are now so
comfortable will die warm in their blankets. As those died in the night when we raided
Otero, he thought. He did not like to remember Otero.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway107
In Otero, that night, was when he first killed and he hoped he would not have to kill in
this of the suppressing of these posts. It was in Otero that Pablo knifed the sentry when
Anselmo pulled the blanket over his head and the sentry caught Anselmo’s foot and
held it, smothered as he was in the blanket, and made a crying noise in the blanket and
Anselmo had to feel in the blanket and knife him until he let go of the foot and was still.
He had his knee across the man’s throat to keep him silent and he was knifing into the
bundle when Pablo tossed the bomb through the window into the room where the men
of the post were all sleeping. And when the flash came it was as though the whole world
burst red and yellow before your eyes and two more bombs were in already. Pablo had
pulled the pins and tossed them quickly through the window, and those who were not
killed in their beds were killed as they rose from bed when the second bomb exploded.
That was in the great days of Pablo when he scourged the country like a tartar and no
fascist post was safe at night.
And now, he is as finished and as ended as a boar that has been altered, Anselmo
thought, and, when the altering has been accomplished and the squealing is over you
cast the two stones away and the boar, that is a boar no longer, goes snouting and
rooting up to them and eats them. No, he is not that bad, Anselmo grinned, one can
think too badly even of Pablo. But he is ugly enough and changed enough.
It is too cold, he thought. That the Inglés should come and that I should not have to kill
in this of the posts. These four Gallegos and their corporal are for those who like the
killing. The Inglés said that. I will do it if it is my duty but the Inglés said that I would be
with him at the bridge and that this would be left to others. At the bridge there will be a
battle and, if I am able to endure the battle, then I will have done all that an old man may
do in this war. But let the Inglés come now, for I am cold and to see the light in the mill
where I know that the Gallegos are warm makes me colder still. I wish that I were in my
own house again and that this war were over. But you have no house now, he thought.
We must win this war before you can ever return to your house.
Inside the sawmill one of the soldiers was sitting on his bunk and greasing his boots.
Another lay in his bunk sleeping. The third was cooking and the corporal was reading a
paper. Their helmets hung on nails driven into the wall and their rifles leaned against the
plank wall.
“What kind of country is this where it snows when it is almost June?” the soldier who
was sitting on the bunk said.
“It is a phenomenon,” the corporal said.
“We are in the moon of May,” the soldier who was cooking said. “The moon of May
has not yet terminated.”
“What kind of a country is it where it snows in May?” the soldier on the bunk insisted.
“In May snow is no rarity in these mountains,” the corporal said. “I have been colder in
Madrid in the month of May than in any other month.”
“And hotter, too,” the soldier who was cooking said.
“May is a month of great contrasts in temperature,” the corporal said. “Here, in Castile,
May is a month of great heat but it can have much cold.”
“Or rain,” the soldier on the bunk said. “In this past May it rained almost every day.”
“It did not,” the soldier who was cooking said. “And anyway this past May was the
moon of April.”
“One could go crazy listening to thee and thy moons,” the corporal said. “Leave this of
the moons alone.”
“Any one who lives either by the sea or by the land knows that it is the moon and not
the month which counts,” the soldier who was cooking said. “Now for example, we have
just started the moon of May. Yet it is coming on June.”
“Why then do we not get definitely behind in the seasons?” the corporal said. “The
whole proposition gives me a headache.”
“You are from a town,” the soldier who was cooking said. “You are from Lugo. What
would you know of the sea or of the land?”
“One learns more in a town than you analfabetos learn in thy sea or thy land.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway108
“In this moon the first of the big schools of sardines come,” the soldier who was
cooking said. “In this moon the sardine boats will be outfitting and the mackerel will have
gone north.”
“Why are you not in the navy if you come from Noya?” the corporal asked.
“Because I am not inscribed from Noya but from Negreira, where I was born. And from
Negreira, which is up the river Tambre, they take you for the army.”
“Worse luck,” said the corporal.
“Do not think the navy is without peril,” the soldier who was sitting on the bunk said.
“Even without the possibility of combat that is a dangerous coast in the winter.”
“Nothing can be worse than the army,” the corporal said.
“And you a corporal,” the soldier who was cooking said. “What a way of speaking is
that?”
“Nay,” the corporal said. “I mean for dangers. I mean the endurance of
bombardments, the necessity to attack, the life of the parapet.”
“Here we have little of that,” the soldier on the bunk said.
“By the Grace of God,” the corporal said. “But who knows when we will be subject to it
again? Certainly we will not have something as easy as this forever!”
“How much longer do you think we will have this detail?”
“I don’t know,” the corporal said. “But I wish we could have it for all of the war.”
“Six hours is too long to be on guard,” the soldier who was cooking said.
“We will have three-hour watches as long as this storm holds,” the corporal said. “That
is only normal.”
“What about all those staff cars?” the soldier on the bunk asked. “I did not like the look
of all those staff cars.”
“Nor I,” the corporal said. “All such things are of evil omen.”
“And aviation,” the soldier who was cooking said. “Aviation is another bad sign.”
“But we have formidable aviation,” the corporal said. “The Reds have no aviation such
as we have. Those planes this morning were something to make any man happy.”
“I have seen the Red planes when they were something serious,” the soldier on the
bunk said. “I have seen those two motor bombers when they were a horror to endure.”
“Yes. But they are not as formidable as our aviation,” the corporal said. “We have an
aviation that is insuperable.”
This was how they were talking in the sawmill while Anselmo waited in the snow
watching the road and the light in the sawmill window.
I hope I am not for the killing, Anselmo was thinking. I think that after the war there will
have to be some great penance done for the killing. If we no longer have religion after
the war then I think there must be some form of civic penance organized that all may be
cleansed from the killing or else we will never have a true and human basis for living.
The killing is necessary, I know, but still the doing of it is very bad for a man and I think
that, after all this is over and we have won the war, there must be a penance of some
kind for the cleansing of us all.
Anselmo was a very good man and whenever he was alone for long, and he was
alone much of the time, this problem of the killing returned to him.
I wonder about the Inglés, he thought. He told me that he did not mind it. Yet he
seems to be both sensitive and kind. It may be that in the younger people it does not
have an importance. It may be that in foreigners, or in those who have not had our
religion, there is not the same attitude. But I think any one doing it will be brutalized in
time and I think that even though necessary, it is a great sin and that afterwards we
must do something very strong to atone for it.
It was dark now and he looked at the light across the road and shook his arms against
his chest to warm them. Now, he thought, he would certainly leave for the camp; but
something kept him there beside the tree above the road. It was snowing harder and
Anselmo thought: if only we could blow the bridge tonight. On a night like this it would be
nothing to take the posts and blow the bridge and it would all be over and done with. On
a night like this you could do anything.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway109
Then he stood there against the tree stamping his feet softly and he did not think any
more about the bridge. The coming of the dark always made him feel lonely and tonight
he felt so lonely that there was a hollowness in him as of hunger. In the old days he
could help this loneliness by the saying of prayers and often coming home from hunting
he would repeat a great number of the same prayer and it made him feel better. But he
had not prayed once since the movement. He missed the prayers but he thought it
would be unfair and hypocritical to say them and he did not wish to ask any favors or for
any different treatment than all the men were receiving.
No, he thought, I am lonely. But so are all the soldiers and the Wives of all the soldiers
and all those who have lost families or parents. I have no wife, but I am glad that she
died before the movement. She would not have understood it. I have no children and I
never will have any children. I am lonely in the day when I am not working but when the
dark comes it is a time of great loneliness. But one thing I have that no man nor any
God can take from me and that is that I have worked well for the Republic. I have
worked hard for the good that we will all share later. I have worked my best from the first
of the movement and I have done nothing that I am ashamed of.
All that I am sorry for is the killing. But surely there will be an opportunity to atone for
that because for a sin of that sort that so many bear, certainly some just relief will be
devised. I would like to talk with the Inglés about it but, being young, it is possible that
he might not understand. He mentioned the killing before. Or was it I that mentioned it?
He must have killed much, but he shows no signs of liking it. In those who like it there is
always a rottenness.
It must really be a great sin, he thought. Because certainly it is the one thing we have
no right to do even though, as I know, it is necessary. But in Spain it is done too lightly
and often without true necessity and there is much quick injustice which, afterward, can
never be repaired. I wish I did not think about it so much, he thought. I wish there were a
penance for it that one could commence now because it is the only thing that I have
done in all my life that makes me feel badly when I am alone. All the other things are
forgiven or one had a chance to atone for them by kindness or in some decent way. But
I think this of the killing must be a very great sin and I would like to fix it up. Later on
there may be certain days that one can work for the state or something that one can do
that will remove it. It will probably be something that one pays as in the days of the
Church, he thought, and smiled. The Church was well organized for sin. That pleased
him and he was smiling in the dark when Robert Jordan came up to him. He came
silently and the old man did not see him until he was there.
“Hola, viejo,” Robert Jordan whispered and clapped him on the back. “How’s the old
one?”
“Very cold,” Anselmo said. Fernando was standing a little apart, his back turned
against the driving snow.
“Come on,” Robert Jordan whispered. “Get on up to camp and get warm. It was a
crime to leave you here so long.”
“That is their light,” Anselmo pointed.
“Where’s the sentry?”
“You do not see him from here. He is around the bend.”
“The hell with them,” Robert Jordan said. “You tell me at camp. Come on, let’s go.”
“Let me show you,” Anselmo said.
“I’m going to look at it in the morning,” Robert Jordan said. “Here, take a swallow of
this.”
He handed the old man his flask. Anselmo tipped it up and swallowed.
“Ayee,” he said and rubbed his mouth. “It is fire.”
“Come on,” Robert Jordan said in the dark. “Let us go.”
It was so dark now you could only see the flakes blowing past and the rigid dark of the
pine trunks. Fernando was standing a little way up the hill. Look at that cigar store
Indian, Robert Jordan thought. I suppose I have to offer him a drink.
“Hey, Fernando,” he said as he came up to him. “A swallow?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway110
“No,” said Fernando. “Thank you.”
Thank you, I mean, Robert Jordan thought. I’m glad cigar store Indians don’t drink.
There isn’t too much of that left. Boy, I’m glad to see this old man, Robert Jordan
thought. He looked at Anselmo and then clapped him on the back again as they started
up the hill.
“I’m glad to see you, viejo,” he said to Anselmo. “If I ever get gloomy, when I see you it
cheers me up. Come on, let’s get up there.”
They were going up the hill in the snow.
“Back to the palace of Pablo,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo. It sounded wonderful in
Spanish.
“El Palacio del Miedo,” Anselmo said. “The Palace of Fear.”
“La cueva de los huevos perdidos,” Robert Jordan capped the other happily. “The
cave of the lost eggs.”
“What eggs?” Fernando asked.
“A joke,” Robert Jordan said. “Just a joke. Not eggs, you know. The others.”
“But why are they lost?” Fernando asked.
“I don’t know,” said Robert Jordan. “Take a book to tell you. Ask Pilar,” then he put his
arm around Anselmo’s shoulder and held him tight as they walked and shook him.
“Listen,” he said. “I’m glad to see you, hear? You don’t know what it means to find
somebody in this country in the same place they were left.”
It showed what confidence and intimacy he had that he could say anything against the
country.
“I am glad to see thee,” Anselmo said. “But I was just about to leave.”
“Like hell you would have,” Robert Jordan said happily. “You’d have frozen first.”
“How was it up above?” Anselmo asked.
“Fine,” said Robert Jordan. “Everything is fine.”
He was very happy with that sudden, rare happiness that can come to any one with a
command in a revolutionary arm; the happiness of finding that even one of your flanks
holds. If both flanks ever held I suppose it would be too much to take, he thought. I don’t
know who is prepared to stand that. And if you extend along a flank, any flank, it
eventually becomes one man. Yes, one man. This was not the axiom he wanted. But
this was a good man. One good man. You are going to be the left flank when we have
the battle, he thought. I better not tell you that yet. It’s going to be an awfully small
battle, he thought. But it’s going to be an awfully good one. Well, I always wanted to
fight one on my own. I always had an opinion on what was wrong with everybody else’s,
from Agincourt down. I will have to make this a good one. It is going to be small but very
select. If I have to do what I think I will have to do it will be very select indeed.
“Listen,” he said to Anselmo. “I’m awfully glad to see you.”
“And me to see thee,” the old man said.
As they went up the hill in the dark, the wind at their backs, the storm blowing past
them as they climbed, Anselmo did not feel lonely. He had not been lonely since the
Inglés had clapped him on the shoulder. The Inglés was pleased and happy and they
joked together. The Inglés said it all went well and he was not worried. The drink in his
stomach warmed him and his feet were warming now climbing.
“Not much on the road,” he said to the Inglés.
“Good,” the Inglés told him. “You will show me when we get there.”
Anselmo was happy now and he was very pleased that he had stayed there at the
post of observation.
If he had come in to camp it would have been all right. It would have been the
intelligent and correct thing to have done under the circumstances, Robert Jordan was
thinking. But he stayed as he was told, Robert Jordan thought. That’s the rarest thing
that can happen in Spain. To stay in a storm, in a way, corresponds to a lot of things. It’s
not for nothing that the Germans call an attack a storm. I could certainly use a couple
more who would stay. I most certainly could. I wonder if that Fernando would stay. It’s
just possible. After all, he is the one who suggested coming out just now. Do you“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway111
suppose he would stay? Wouldn’t that be good? He’s just about stubborn enough. I’ll
have to make some inquiries. Wonder what the old cigar store Indian is thinking about
now.
“What are you thinking about, Fernando?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Why do you ask?”
“Curiosity,” Robert Jordan said. “I am a man of great curiosity.”
“I was thinking of supper,” Fernando said.
“Do you like to eat?”
“Yes. Very much.”
“How’s Pilar’s cooking?”
“Average,” Fernando answered.
He’s a second Coolidge, Robert Jordan thought. But, you know, I have just a hunch
that he would stay.
The three of them plodded up the hill in the snow.
16
“El Sordo was here,” Pilar said to Robert Jordan. They had come in out of the storm to
the smoky warmth of the cave and the woman had motioned Robert Jordan over to her
with a nod of her head. “He’s gone to look for horses.”
“Good. Did he leave any word for me?”
“Only that he had gone for horses.”
“And we?”
“No sé,” she said. “Look at him.”
Robert Jordan had seen Pablo when he came in and Pablo had grinned at him. Now
he looked over at him sitting at the board table and grinned and waved his hand.
“Inglés,” Pablo called. “It’s still falling, Inglés.”
Robert Jordan nodded at him.
“Let me take thy shoes and dry them,” Maria said. “I will hang them here in the smoke
of the fire.”
“Watch out you don’t burn them,” Robert Jordan told her. “I don’t want to go around
here barefoot. What’s the matter?” he turned to Pilar. “Is this a meeting? Haven’t you
any sentries out?”
“In this storm? Qué va.”
There were six men sitting at the table and leaning back against the wall. Anselmo
and Fernando were still shaking the snow from their jackets, beating their trousers and
rapping their feet against the wall by the entrance.
“Let me take thy jacket,” Maria said. “Do not let the snow melt on it.”
Robert Jordan slipped out of his jacket, beat the snow from his trousers, and untied
his shoes.
“You will get everything wet here,” Pilar said.
“It was thee who called me.”
“Still there is no impediment to returning to the door for thy brushing.”
“Excuse me,” Robert Jordan said, standing in his bare feet on the dirt floor. “Hunt me a
pair of socks, Maria.”
“The Lord and Master,” Pilar said and poked a piece of wood into the fire.
“Hay que aprovechar el tiempo,” Robert Jordan told her. “You have to take advantage
of what time there is.”
“It is locked,” Maria said.
“Here is the key,” and he tossed it over.
“It does not fit this sack.”
“It is the other sack. They are on top and at the side.”
The girl found the pair of socks, closed the sack, locked it and brought them over with
the key.
“Sit down and put them on and rub thy feet well,” she said. Robert Jordan grinned at“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway112
her.
“Thou canst not dry them with thy hair?” he said for Pilar to hear.
“What a swine,” she said. “First he is the Lord of the Manor. Now he is our ex-Lord
Himself. Hit him with a chunk of wood, Maria.”
“Nay,” Robert Jordan said to her. “I am joking because I am happy.”
“You are happy?”
“Yes,” he said. “I think everything goes very well.”
“Roberto,” Maria said. “Go sit down and dry thy feet and let me bring thee something
to drink to warm thee.”
“You would think that man had never dampened foot before,” Pilar said. “Nor that a
flake of snow had ever fallen.”
Maria brought him a sheepskin and put it on the dirt floor of the cave.
“There,” she said. “Keep that under thee until thy shoes are dry.”
The sheepskin was fresh dried and not tanned and as Robert Jordan rested his
stocking feet on it he could feel it crackle like parchment.
The fire was smoking and Pilar called to Maria, “Blow up the fire, worthless one. This
is no smokehouse.”
“Blow it thyself,” Maria said. “I am searching for the bottle that El Sordo left.”
“It is behind his packs,” Pilar told her. “Must you care for him as a sucking child?”
“No,” Maria said. “As a man who is cold and wet. And a man who has just come to his
house. Here it is.” She brought the bottle to where Robert Jordan sat. “It is the bottle of
this noon. With this bottle one could make a beautiful lamp. When we have electricity
again, what a lamp we can make of this bottle.” She looked at the pinch-bottle
admiringly. “How do you take this, Roberto?”
“I thought I was Inglés,” Robert Jordan said to her.
“I call thee Roberto before the others,” she said in a low voice and blushed. “How do
you want it, Roberto?”
“Roberto,” Pablo said thickly and nodded his head at Robert Jordan. “How do you
want it, Don Roberto?”
“Do you want some?” Robert Jordan asked him.
Pablo shook his head. “I am making myself drunk with wine,” he said with dignity.
“Go with Bacchus,” Robert Jordan said in Spanish.
“Who is Bacchus?” Pablo asked.
“A comrade of thine,” Robert Jordan said.
“Never have I heard of him,” Pablo said heavily. “Never in these mountains.”
“Give a cup to Anselmo,” Robert Jordan said to Maria. “It is he who is cold.” He was
putting on the dry pair of socks and the whiskey and water in the cup tasted clean and
thinly warming. But it does not curl around inside of you the way the absinthe does, he
thought. There is nothing like absinthe.
Who would imagine they would have whiskey up here, he thought. But La Granja was
the most likely place in Spain to find it when you thought it over. Imagine Sordo getting a
bottle for the visiting dynamiter and then remembering to bring it down and leave it. It
wasn’t just manners that they had. Manners would have been producing the bottle and
having a formal drink. That was what the French would have done and then they would
have saved what was left for another occasion. No, the true thoughtfulness of thinking
the visitor would like it and then bringing it down for him to enjoy when you yourself were
engaged in something where there was every reason to think of no one else but yourself
and of nothing but the matter in hand—that was Spanish. One kind of Spanish, he
thought. Remembering to bring the whiskey was one of the reasons you loved these
people. Don’t go romanticizing them, he thought. There are as many sorts of Spanish as
there are Americans. But still, bringing the whiskey was very handsome.
“How do you like it?” he asked Anselmo.
The old man was sitting by the fire with a smile on his face, his big hands holding the
cup. He shook his head.
“No?” Robert Jordan asked him.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway113
“The child put water in it,” Anselmo said.
“Exactly as Roberto takes it,” Maria said. “Art thou something special?”
“No,” Anselmo told her. “Nothing special at all. But I like to feel it burn as it goes
down.”
“Give me that,” Robert Jordan told the girl, “and pour him some of that which burns.”
He tipped the contents of the cup into his own and handed it back empty to the girl,
who poured carefully into it from the bottle.
“Ah,” Anselmo took the cup, put his head back and let it run down his throat. He
looked at Maria standing holding the bottle and winked at her, tears coming from both
eyes. “That,” he said. “That.” Then he licked his lips. “That is what kills the worm that
haunts us.”
“Roberto,” Maria said and came over to him, still holding the bottle. “Are you ready to
eat?”
“Is it ready?”
“It is ready when you wish it.”
“Have the others eaten?”
“All except you, Anselmo and Fernando.”
“Let us eat then,” he told her. “And thou?”
“Afterwards with Pilar.”
“Eat now with us.”
“No. It would not be well.”
“Come on and eat. In my country a man does not eat before his woman.”
“That is thy country. Here it is better to eat after.”
“Eat with him,” Pablo said, looking up from the table. “Eat with him. Drink with him.
Sleep with him. Die with him. Follow the customs of his country.”
“Are you drunk?” Robert Jordan said, standing in front of Pablo. The dirty, stubble-
faced man looked at him happily.
“Yes,” Pablo said. “Where is thy country, Inglés, where the women eat with the men?”
“In Estados Unidos in the state of Montana.”
“Is it there that the men wear skirts as do the women?”
“No. That is in Scotland.”
“But listen,” Pablo said. “When you wear skirts like that, Inglés—”
“I don’t wear them,” Robert Jordan said.
“When you are wearing those skirts,” Pablo went on, “what do you wear under them?”
“I don’t know what the Scotch wear,” Robert Jordan said. “I’ve wondered myself.”
“Not the Escoceses,” Pablo said. “Who cares about the Escoceses? Who cares about
anything with a name as rare as that? Not me. I don’t care. You, I say, Inglés. You.
What do you wear under your skirts in your country?”
“Twice I have told you that we do not wear skirts,” Robert Jordan said. “Neither drunk
nor in joke.”
“But under your skirts,” Pablo insisted. “Since it is well known that you wear skirts.
Even the soldiers. I have seen photographs and also I have seen them in the Circus of
Price. What do you wear under your skirts, Inglés?”
“Los cojones,” Robert Jordan said.
Anselmo laughed and so did the others who were listening; all except Fernando. The
sound of the word, of the gross word spoken before the women, was offensive to him.
“Well, that is normal,” Pablo said. “But it seems to me that with enough cojones you
would not wear skirts.”
“Don’t let him get started again, Inglés,” the flat-faced man with the broken nose who
was called Primitivo said. “He is drunk. Tell me, what do they raise in your country?”
“Cattle and sheep,” Robert Jordan said. “Much grain also and beans. And also much
beets for sugar.”
The three were at the table now and the others sat close by except Pablo, who sat by
himself in front of a bowl of the wine. It was the same stew as the night before and
Robert Jordan ate it hungrily.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway114
“In your country there are mountains? With that name surely there are mountains,”
Primitivo asked politely to make conversation. He was embarrassed at the drunkenness
of Pablo.
“Many mountains and very high.”
“And are there good pastures?”
“Excellent; high pasture in the summer in forests controlled by the government. Then
in the fall the cattle are brought down to the lower ranges.”
“Is the land there owned by the peasants?”
“Most land is owned by those who farm it. Originally the land was owned by the state
and by living on it and declaring the intent~on of improving it, a man could obtain a title
to a hundred and fifty hectares.”
“Tell me how this is done,” Agustín asked. “That is an agrarian reform which means
something.”
Robert Jordan explained the process of homesteading. He had never thought of it
before as an agrarian reform.
“That is magnificent,” Primitivo said. “Then you have a communism in your country?”
“No. That is done under the Republic.”
“For me,” Agustín said, “everything can be done under the Republic. I see no need for
other form of government.”
“Do you have no big proprietors?” Andrés asked.
“Many.”
“Then there must be abuses.”
“Certainly. There are many abuses.”
“But you will do away with them?”
“We try to more and more. But there are many abuses still.”
“But there are not great estates that must be broken up?”
“Yes. But there are those who believe that taxes will break them up.”
“How?”
Robert Jordan, wiping out the stew bowl with bread, explained how the income tax
and inheritance tax worked. “But the big estates remain. Also there are taxes on the
land,” he said.
“But surely the big proprietors and the rich will make a revolution against such taxes.
Such taxes appear to me to be revolutionary. They will revolt against the government
when they see that they are threatened, exactly as the fascists have done here,”
Primitivo said.
“It is possible.”
“Then you will have to fight in your country as we fight here.”
“Yes, we will have to fight.”
“But are there not many fascists in your country?”
“There are many who do not know they are fascists but will find it out when the time
comes.”
“But you cannot destroy them until they rebel?”
“No,” Robert Jordan said. “We cannot destroy them. But we can educate the people
so that they will fear fascism and recognize it as it appears and combat it.”
“Do you know where there are no fascists?” Andrés asked.
“Where?”
“In the town of Pablo,” Andrés said and grinned.
“You know what was done in that village?” Primitivo asked Robert Jordan.
“Yes. I have heard the story.”
“From Pilar?”
“Yes.”
“You could not hear all of it from the woman,” Pablo said heavily. “Because she did not
see the end of it because she fell from a chair outside of the window.”
“You tell him what happened then,” Pilar said. “Since I know not the story, let you tell
it.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway115
“Nay,” Pablo said. “I have never told it.”
“No,” Pilar said. “And you will not tell it. And now you wish it had not happened.”
“No,” Pablo said. “That is not true. And if all had killed the fascists as I did we would
not have this war. But I would not have had it happen as it happened.”
“Why do you say that?” Primitivo asked him. “Are you changing your politics?”
“No. But it was barbarous,” Pablo said. “In those days I was very barbarous.”
“And now you are drunk,” Pilar said.
“Yes,” Pablo said. “With your permission.”
“I liked you better when you were barbarous,” the woman said. “Of all men the
drunkard is the foulest. The thief when he is not stealing is like another. The extortioner
does not practise in the home. The murderer when he is at home can wash his hands.
But the drunkard stinks and vomits in his own bed and dissolves his organs in alcohol.”
“You are a woman and you do not understand,” Pablo said equably. “I am drunk on
wine and I would be happy except for those people I have killed. All of them fill me with
sorrow.” He shook his head lugubriously.
“Give him some of that which Sordo brought,” Pilar said. “Give him something to
animate him. He is becoming too sad to bear.”
“If I could restore them to life, I would,” Pablo said.
“Go and obscenity thyself,” Agustín said to him. “What sort of place is this?”
“I would bring them all back to life,” Pablo said sadly. “Every one.”
“Thy mother,” Agustín shouted at him. “Stop talking like this or get out. Those were
fascists you killed.”
“You heard me,” Pablo said. “I would restore them all to life.”
“And then you would walk on the water,” Pilar said. “In my life I have never seen such
a man. Up until yesterday you preserved some remnants of manhood. And today there
is not enough of you left to make a sick kitten. Yet you are happy in your soddenness.”
“We should have killed all or none,” Pablo nodded his head. “All or none.”
“Listen, Inglés,” Agustín said. “How did you happen to come to Spain? Pay no
attention to Pablo. He is drunk.”
“I came first twelve years ago to study the country and the language,” Robert Jordan
said. “I teach Spanish in a university.”
“You look very little like a professoi” Primitivo said.
“He has no beard,” Pablo said. “Look at him. He has no beard.”
“Are you truly a professor?”
“An instructor.”
“But you teach?”
“Yes.”
“But why Spanish?” Andrés asked. “Would it not be easier to teach English since you
are English?”
“He speaks Spanish as we do,” Anselmo said. “Why should he not teach Spanish?”
“Yes. But it is, in a way, presumptuous for a foreigner to teach Spanish,” Fernando
said. “I mean nothing against you, Don Roberto.”
“He’s a false professor,” Pablo said, very pleased with himself. “He hasn’t got a
beard.”
“Surely you know English better,” Fernando said. “Would it not be better and easier
and clearer to teach English?”
“He doesn’t teach it to Spaniards—” Pilar started to intervene.
“I should hope not,” Fernando said.
“Let me finish, you mule,” Pilar said to him. “He teaches Spanish to Americans. North
Americans.”
“Can they not speak Spanish?” Fernando asked. “South Americans can.”
“Mule,” Pilar said. “He teaches Spanish to North Americans who speak English.”
“Still and all I think it would be easier for him to teach English if that is what he
speaks,” Fernando said.
“Can’t you hear he speaks Spanish?” Pilar shook her head hopelessly at Robert“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway116
Jordan.
“Yes. But with an accent.”
“Of where?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Of Estremadura,” Fernando said primly.
“Oh my mother,” Pilar said. “What a people!”
“It is possible,” Robert Jordan said. “I have come here from there.”
“As he well knows,” Pilar said. “You old maid,” she turned to Fernando. “Have you had
enough to eat?”
“I could eat more if there is a sufficient quantity,” Fernando told her. “And do not think
that I wish to say anything against you, Don Roberto—”
“Milk,” Agustín said simply. “And milk again. Do we make the revolution in order to say
Don Roberto to a comrade?”
“For me the revolution is so that all will say Don to all,” Fernando said. “Thus should it
be under the Republic.”
“Milk,” Agustín said. “Black milk.”
“And I still think it would be easier and clearer for Don Roberto to teach English.”
“Don Roberto has no beard,” Pablo said. “He is a false professor.”
“What do you mean, I have no beard?” Robert Jordan said. “What’s this?” He stroked
his chin and his cheeks where the threeday growth made a blond stubble.
“Not a beard,” Pablo said. He shook his head. “That’s not a beard.” He was almost
jovial now. “He’s a false professor.”
“I obscenity in the milk of all,” Agustín said, “if it does not seem like a lunatic asylum
here.”
“You should drink,” Pablo said to him. “To me everything appears normal. Except the
lack of beard of Don Roberto.”
Maria ran her hand over Robert Jordan’s cheek.
“He has a beard,” she said to Pablo.
“You should know,” Pablo said and Robert Jordan looked at him.
I don’t think he is so drunk, Robert Jordan thought. No, not so drunk. And I think I had
better watch myself.
“Thou,” he said to Pablo. “Do you think this snow will last?”
“What do you think?”
“I asked you.”
“Ask another,” Pablo told him. “I am not thy service of information. You have a paper
from thy service of information. Ask the woman. She commands.”
“I asked thee.”
“Go and obscenity thyself,” Pablo told him. “Thee and the woman and the girl.”
“He is drunk,” Primitivo said. “Pay him no heed, Inglés.”
“I do not think he is so drunk,” Robert Jordan said.
Maria was standing behind him and Robert Jordan saw Pablo watching her over his
shoulder. The small eyes, like a boar’s, were watching her out of the round, stubble-
covered head and Robert Jordan thought: I have known many killers in this war and
some before and they were all different; there is no common trait nor feature; nor any
such thing as the criminal type; but Pablo is certainly not handsome.
“I don’t believe you can drink,” he said to Pablo. “Nor that you’re drunk.”
“I am drunk,” Pablo said with dignity. “To drink is nothing. It is to be drunk that is
important. Estoy muy borracho.”
“I doubt it,” Robert Jordan told him. “Cowardly, yes.”
It was so quiet in the cave, suddenly, that he could hear the hissing noise the wood
made burning on the hearth where Pilar cooked. He heard the sheepskin crackle as he
rested his weight on his feet. He thought he could almost hear the snow falling outside.
He could not, but he could hear the silence where it fell.
I’d like to kill him and have it over with, Robert Jordan was thinking. I don’t know what
he is going to do, but it is nothing good. Day after tomorrow is the bridge and this man is
bad and he constitutes a danger to the success of the whole enterprise. Come on. Let“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway117
us get it over with.
Pablo grinned at him and put one finger up and wiped it across his throat. He shook
his head that turned only a little each way on his thick, short neck.
“Nay, Inglés,” he said. “Do not provoke me.” He looked at Pilar and said to her, “It is
not thus that you get rid of me.”
“Sinverguenza,” Robert Jordan said to him, committed now in his own mind to the
action. “Cobarde.”
“It is very possible,” Pablo said. “But I am not to be provoked. Take something to drink,
Inglés, and signal to the woman it was not successful.”
“Shut thy mouth,” Robert Jordan said. “I provoke thee for myself.”
“It is not worth the trouble,” Pablo told him. “I do not provoke.”
“Thou art a bicho raro,” Robert Jordan said, not wanting to let it go; not wanting to
have it fail for the second time; knowing as he spoke that this had all been gone through
before; having that feeling that he was playing a part from memory of something that he
had read or had dreamed, feeling it all moving in a circle.
“Very rare, yes,” Pablo said. “Very rare and very drunk. To your health, Inglés.” He
dipped a cup in the wine bowl and held it up. “Salud y cojones.”
He’s rare, all right, Robert Jordan thought, and smart, and very complicated. He could
no longer hear the fire for the sound of his own breathing.
“Here’s to you,” Robert Jordan said, and dipped a cup into the wine. Betrayal wouldn’t
amount to anything without all these pledges, he thought. Pledge up. “Salud,” he said.
“Salud and Salud again,” you salud, he thought. Salud, you salud.
“Don Roberto,” Pablo said heavily.
“Don Pablo,” Robert Jordan said.
“You’re no professor,” Pablo said, “because you haven’t got a beard. And also to do
away with me you have to assassinate me and, for this, you have not cojones.”
He was looking at Robert Jordan with his mouth closed so that his lips made a tight
line, like the mouth of a fish, Robert Jordan thought. With that head it is like one of those
porcupine fish that swallow air and swell up after they are caught.
“Salud, Pablo,” Robert Jordan said and raised the cup up and drank from it. “I am
learning much from thee.”
“I am teaching the professor,” Pablo nodded his head. “Come on, Don Roberto, we will
be friends.”
“We are friends already,” Robert Jordan said.
“But now we will be good friends.”
“We are good friends already.”
“I’m going to get out of here,” Agustín said. “Truly, it is said that we must eat a ton of it
in this life but I have twenty-five pounds of it stuck in each of my ears this minute.”
“What is the matter, negro?” Pablo said to him. “Do you not like to see friendship
between Don Roberto and me?”
“Watch your mouth about calling me negro.” Agustín went over to him and stood in
front of Pablo holding his hands low.
“So you are called,” Pablo said.
“Not by thee.”
“Well, then, blanco—”
“Nor that, either.”
“What are you then, Red?”
“Yes. Red. Rojo. With the Red star of the army and in favor of the Republic. And my
name is Agustín.”
“What a patriotic man,” Pablo said. “Look, Inglés, what an exemplary patriot.”
Agustín hit him hard across the mouth with his left hand, bringing it forward in a
slapping, backhand sweep. Pablo sat there. The corners of his mouth were wine-stained
and his expression did not change, but Robert Jordan watched his eyes narrow, as a
cat’s pupils close to vertical slits in a strong light.
“Nor this,” Pablo said. “Do not count on this, woman.” He turned his head toward Pilar.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway118
“I am not provoked.”
Agustín hit him again. This time he hit him on the mouth with his closed fist. Robert
Jordan was holding his pistol in his hand under the table. He had shoved the safety
catch off and he pushed Maria away with his left hand. She moved a little way and he
pushed her hard in the ribs with his left hand again to make her get really away. She
was gone now and he saw her from the corner of his eye, slipping along the side of the
cave toward the fire and now Robert Jordan watched Pablo’s face.
The round-headed man sat staring at Agustín from his flat little eyes. The pupils were
even smaller now. He licked his lips then, put up an arm and wiped his mouth with the
back of his hand, looked down and saw the blood on his hand. He ran his tongue over
his lips, then spat.
“Nor that,” he said. “I am not a fool. I do not provoke.”
“Cabrón,” Agustín said.
“You should know,” Pablo said. “You know the woman.”
Agustín hit him again hard in the mouth and Pablo laughed at him, showing the yellow,
bad, broken teeth in the reddened line of his mouth.
“Leave it alone,” Pablo said and reached with a cup to scoop some wine from the
bowl. “Nobody here has cojones to kill me and this of the hands is silly.”
“Cobarde,” Agustín said.
“Nor words either,” Pablo said and made a swishing noise rinsing the wine in his
mouth. He spat on the floor. “I am far past words.”
Agustín stood there looking down at him and cursed him, speaking slowly, clearly,
bitterly and contemptuously and cursing as steadily as though he were dumping manure
on a field, lifting it with a dung fork out of a wagon.
“Nor of those,” Pablo said. “Leave it, Agustín. And do not hit me more. Thou wilt injure
thy hands.”
Agustín turned from him and went to the door.
“Do not go out,” Pablo said. “It is snowing outside. Make thyself comfortable in here.”
“And thou! Thou!” Agustín turned from the door and spoke to him, putting all his
contempt in the single, “Tu.”
“Yes, me,” said Pablo. “I will be alive when you are dead.”
He dipped up another cup of wine and raised it to Robert Jordan. “To the professor,”
he said. Then turned to Pilar. “To the Señora Commander.” Then toasted them all, “To
all the illusioned ones.”
Agustín walked over to him and, striking quickly with the side of his hand, knocked the
cup out of his hand.
“That is a waste,” Pablo said. “That is silly.”
Agustín said something vile to him.
“No,” Pablo said, dipping up another cup. “I am drunk, seest thou? When I am not
drunk I do not talk. You have never heard me talk much. But an intelligent man is
sometimes forced to be drunk to spend his time with fools.”
“Go and obscenity in the milk of thy cowardice,” Pilar said to him. “I know too much
about thee and thy cowardice.”
“How the woman talks,” Pablo said. “I will be going out to see the horses.”
“Go and befoul them,” Agustín said. “Is not that one of thy customs?”
“No,” Pablo said and shook his head. He was taking down his big blanket cape from
the wall and he looked at Agustín. “Thou,” he said, “and thy violence.”
“What do you go to do with the horses?” Agustín said.
“Look to them,” Pablo said.
“Befoul them,” Agustín said. “Horse lover.”
“I care for them very much,” Pablo said. “Even from behind they are handsomer and
have more sense than these people. Divert yourselves,” he said and grinned. “Speak to
them of the bridge, Inglés. Explain their duties in the attack. Tell them how to conduct
the retreat. Where will you take them, Inglés, after the bridge? Where will you take your
patriots? I have thought of it all day while I have been drinking.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway119
“What have you thought?” Agustín asked.
“What have I thought?” Pablo said and moved his tongue around exploringly inside his
lips. “Qué te importa, what have I thought.”
“Say it,” Agustín said to him.
“Much,” Pablo said. He pulled the blanket coat over his head, the roundness of his
head protruding now from the dirty yellow folds of the blanket. “I have thought much.”
“What?” Agustín said. “What?”
“I have thought you are a group of illusioned people,” Pablo said. “Led by a woman
with her brains between her thighs and a foreigner who comes to destroy you.”
“Get out,” Pilar shouted at him. “Get out and fist yourself into the snow. Take your bad
milk out of here, you horse exhausted maricon.”
“Thus one talks,” Agustín said admiringly, but absent-mindedly. He was worried.
“I go,” said Pablo. “But I will be back shortly.” He lifted the blanket over the door of the
cave and stepped out. Then from the door he called, “It’s still falling, Inglés.”
17
The only noise in the cave now was the hissing from the hearth where snow was
falling through the hole in the roof onto the coals of the fire.
“Pilar,” Fernando said. “Is there more of the stew?”
“Oh, shut up,” the woman said. But Maria took Fernando’s bowl over to the big pot set
back from the edge of the fire and ladled into it. She brought it over to the table and set
it down and then patted Fernando on the shoulder as he bent to eat. She stood for a
moment beside him, her hand on his shoulder. But Fernando did not look up. He was
devoting himself to the stew.
Agustín stood beside the fire. The others were seated. Pilar sat at the table opposite
Robert Jordan.
“Now, Inglés,” she said, “you have seen how he is.”
“What will he do?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Anything,” the woman looked down at the table. “Anything. He is capable of doing
anything.”
“Where is the automatic rifle?” Robert Jordan asked.
“There in the corner wrapped in the blanket,” Primitivo said. “Do you want it?”
“Later,” Robert Jordan said. “I wished to know where it is.”
“It is there,” Primitivo said. “I brought it in and I have wrapped it in my blanket to keep
the action dry. The pans are in that sack.”
“He would not do that,” Pilar said. “He would not do anything with the máquina.”
“I thought you said he would do anything.”
“He might,” she said. “But he has no practice with the máquina. He could toss in a
bomb. That is more his style.”
“It is an idiocy and a weakness not to have killed him,” the gypsy said. He had taken
no part in any of the talk all evening. “Last night Roberto should have killed him.”
“Kill him,” Pilar said. Her big face was dark and tired looking. “I am for it now.”
“I was against it,” Agustín said. He stood in front of the fire, his long arms hanging by
his sides, his cheeks, stubble-shadowed below the cheekbones, hollow in the firelight.
“Now I am for it,” he said. “He is poisonous now and he would like to see us all
destroyed.”
“Let all speak,” Pilar said and her voice was tired. “Thou, Andrés?”
“Matarlo,” the brother with the dark hair growing far down in the point on his forehead
said and nodded his head.
“Eladio?”
“Equally,” the other brother said. “To me he seems to constitute a great danger. And
he serves for nothing.”
“Primitivo?”
“Equally.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway120
“Fernando?”
“Could we not hold him as a prisoner?” Fernando asked.
“Who would look after a prisoner?” Primitivo said. “It would take two men to look after
a prisoner and what would we do with him in the end?”
“We could sell him to the fascists,” the gypsy said.
“None of that,” Agustín said. “None of that filthiness.”
“It was only an idea,” Rafael, the gypsy, said. “It seems to me that the facciosos would
be happy to have him.”
“Leave it alone,” Agustín said. “That is filthy.”
“No filthier than Pablo,” the gypsy justified himself.
“One filthiness does not justify another,” Agustín said. “Well, that is all. Except for the
old man and the Inglés.”
“They are not in it,” Pilar said. “He has not been their leader.”
“One moment,” Fernando said. “I have not finished.”
“Go ahead,” Pilar said. “Talk until he comes back. Talk until he rolls a hand grenade
under that blanket and blows this all up. Dynamite and all.”
“I think that you exaggerate, Pilar,” Fernando said. “I do not think that he has any such
conception.”
“I do not think so either,” Agustín said. “Because that would blow the wine up too and
he will be back in a little while to the wine.”
“Why not turn him over to El Sordo and let El Sordo sell him to the fascists?” Rafael
suggested. “You could blind him and he would be easy to handle.”
“Shut up,” Pilar said. “I feel something very justified against thee too when thou
talkest.”
“The fascists would pay nothing for him anyway,” Primitivo said. “Such things have
been tried by others and they pay nothing. They will shoot thee too.”
“I believe that blinded he could be sold for something,” Rafael said.
“Shut up,” Pilar said. “Speak of blinding again and you can go with the other.”
“But, he, Pablo, blinded the guardia civil who was wounded,” the gypsy insisted. “You
have forgotten that?”
“Close thy mouth,” Pilar said to him. She was embarrassed before Robert Jordan by
this talk of blinding.
“I have not been allowed to finish,” Fernando interrupted.
“Finish,” Pilar told him. “Go on. Finish.”
“Since it is impractical to hold Pablo as a prisoner,” Fernando commenced, “and since
it is repugnant to offer him—”
“Finish,” Pilar said. “For the love of God, finish.”
“—in any class of negotiation,” Fernando proceeded calmly, “I am agreed that it is
perhaps best that he should be eliminated in order that the operations projected should
be insured of the maximum possibility of success.”
Pilar looked at the little man, shook her head, bit her lips and said nothing.
“That is my opinion,” Fernando said. “I believe we are justified in believing that he
constitutes a danger to the Republic—”
“Mother of God,” Pilar said. “Even here one man can make a bureaucracy with his
mouth.”
“Both from his own words and his recent actions,” Fernando continued. “And while he
is deserving of gratitude for his actions in the early part of the movement and up until the
most recent time—”
Pilar had walked over to the fire. Now she came up to the table.
“Fernando,” Pilar said quietly and handed a bowl to him. “Take this stew please in all
formality and fill thy mouth with it and talk no more. We are in possession of thy
opinion.”
“But, how then—” Primitivo asked and paused without completing the sentence.
“Estoy listo,” Robert Jordan said. “I am ready to do it. Since you are all decided that it
should be done it is a service that I can do.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway121
What’s the matter? he thought. From listening to him I am beginning to talk like
Fernando. That language must be infectious. French, the language of diplomacy.
Spanish, the language of bureaucracy.
“No,” Maria said. “No.”
“This is none of thy business,” Pilar said to the girl. “Keep thy mouth shut.”
“I will do it tonight,” Robert Jordan said.
He saw Pilar looking at him, her fingers on her lips. She was looking toward the door.
The blanket fastened across the opening of the cave was lifted and Pablo put his head
in. He grinned at them all, pushed under the blanket and then turned and fastened it
again. He turned around and stood there, then pulled the blanket cape over his head
and shook the snow from it.
“You were speaking of me?” he addressed them all. “I am interrupting?”
No one answered him and he hung the cape on a peg in the wall and walked over to
the table.
“Qué tal?” he asked and picked up his cup which had stood empty on the table and
dipped it into the wine bowl. “There is no wine,” he said to Maria. “Go draw some from
the skin.”
Maria picked up the bowl and went over to the dusty, heavily distended, black-tarred
wineskin that hung neck down from the wall and unscrewed the plug from one of the
legs enough so that the wine squirted from the edge of the plug into the bowl. Pablo
watched her kneeling, holding the bowl up and watched the light red wine flooding into
the bowl so fast that it made a whirling motion as it filled it.
“Be careful,” he said to her. “The wine’s below the chest now.”
No one said anything.
“I drank from the belly-button to the chest today,” Pablo said. “It’s a day’s work. What’s
the matter with you all? Have you lost your tongues?”
No one said anything at all.
“Screw it up, Maria,” Pablo said. “Don’t let it spill.”
“There’ll be plenty of wine,” Agustín said. “You’ll be able to be drunk.”
“One has encountered his tongue,” Pablo said and nodded to Agustín. “Felicitations. I
thought you’d been struck dumb.”
“By what?” Agustín asked.
“By my entry.”
“Thinkest thou that thy entry carries importance?”
He’s working himself up to it, maybe, Robert Jordan thought. Maybe Agustín is going
to do it. He certainly hates him enough. I don’t hate him, he thought. No, I don’t hate
him. He is disgusting but I do not hate him. Though that blinding business puts him in a
special class. Still this is their war. But he is certainly nothing to have around for the next
two days. I am going to keep away out of it, he thought. I made a fool of myself with him
once tonight and I am perfectly willing to liquidate him. But I am not going to fool with
him beforehand. And there are not going to be any shooting matches or monkey
business in here with that dynamite around either. Pablo thought of that, of course. And
did you think of it, he said to himself? No, you did not and neither did Agustín. You
deserve whatever happens to you, he thought.
“Agustín,” he said.
“What?” Agustín looked up sullenly and turned his head away from Pablo.
“I wish to speak to thee,” Robert Jordan said.
“Later.”
“Now,” Robert Jordan said. “Por favor.”
Robert Jordan had walked to the opening of the cave and Pablo followed him with his
eyes. Agustín, tall and sunken cheeked, stood up and came over to him. He moved
reluctantly and contemptuously.
“Thou hast forgotten what is in the sacks?” Robert Jordan said to him, speaking so low
that it could not be heard.
“Milk!” Agustín said. “One becomes accustomed and one forgets.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway122
“I, too, forgot.”
“Milk!” Agustín said. “Leche! What fools we are.” He swung back loose-jointedly to the
table and sat down. “Have a drink, Pablo, old boy,” he said. “How were the horses?”
“Very good,” Pablo said. “And it is snowing less.”
“Do you think it will stop?”
“Yes,” Pablo said. “It is thinning now and there are small, hard pellets. The wind will
blow but the snow is going. The wind has changed.”
“Do you think it will clear tomorrow?” Robert Jordan asked him.
“Yes,” Pablo said. “I believe it will be cold and clear. This wind is shifting.”
Look at him, Robert Jordan thought. Now he is friendly. He has shifted like the wind.
He has the face and the body of a pig and I know he is many times a murderer and yet
he has the sensitivity of a good aneroid. Yes, he thought, and the pig is a very intelligent
animal, too. Pablo has hatred for us, or perhaps it is only for our projects, and pushes
his hatred with insults to the point where you are ready to do away with him and when
he sees that this point has been reached he drops it and starts all new and clean again.
“We will have good weather for it, Inglés,” Pablo said to Robert Jordan.
“We,” Pilar said. “We?”
“Yes, we,” Pablo grinned at her and drank some of the wine. “Why not? I thought it
over while I was outside. Why should we not agree?”
“In what?” the woman asked. “In what now?”
“In all,” Pablo said to her. “In this of the bridge. I am with thee now.”
“You are with us now?” Agustín said to him. “After what you have said?”
“Yes,” Pablo told him. “With the change of the weather I am with thee.”
Agustín shook his head. “The weather,” he said and shook his head again. “And after
me hitting thee in the face?”
“Yes,” Pablo grinned at him and ran his fingers over his lips. “After that too.”
Robert Jordan was watching Pilar. She was looking at Pablo as at some strange
animal. On her face there was still a shadow of the expression the mention of the
blinding had put there. She shook her head as though to be rid of that, then tossed it
back. “Listen,” she said to Pablo.
“Yes, woman.”
“What passes with thee?”
“Nothing,” Pablo said. “I have changed my opinion. Nothing more.”
“You were listening at the door,” she told him.
“Yes,” he said. “But I could hear nothing.”
“You fear that we will kill thee.”
“No,” he told her and looked at her over the wine cup. “I do not fear that. You know
that.”
“Well, what passes with thee?” Agustín said. “One moment you are drunk and putting
your mouth on all of us and disassociating yourself from the work in hand and speaking
of our death in a dirty manner and insulting the women and opposing that which should
be done—”
“I was drunk,” Pablo told him.
“And now—”
“I am not drunk,” Pablo said. “And I have changed my mind.”
“Let the others trust thee. I do not,” Agustín said.
“Trust me or not,” Pablo said. “But there is no one who can take thee to Gredos as I
can.”
“Gredos?”
“It is the only place to go after this of the bridge.”
Robert Jordan, looking at Pilar, raised his hand on the side away from Pablo and
tapped his right ear questioningly.
The woman nodded. Then nodded again. She said something to Maria and the girl
came over to Robert Jordan’s side.
“She says, ‘Of course he heard,” Maria said in Robert Jordan’s ear.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway123
“Then Pablo,” Fernando said judicially. “Thou art with us now and in favor of this of the
bridge?”
“Yes, man,” Pablo said. He looked Fernando squarely in the eye and nodded.
“In truth?” Primitivo asked.
“De veras,” Pablo told him.
“And you think it can be successful?” Fernando asked. “You now have confidence?”
“Why not?” Pablo said. “Haven’t you confidence?”
“Yes,” Fernando said. “But I always have confidence.”
“I’m going to get out of here,” Agustín said.
“It is cold outside,” Pablo told him in a friendly tone.
“Maybe,” Agustín said. “But I can’t stay any longer in this manicomio.”
“Do not call this cave an insane asylum,” Fernando said.
“A manicomio for criminal lunatics,” Agustín said. “And I’m getting out before I’m crazy,
too.”
18
It is like a merry-go-round, Robert Jordan thought. Not a merry-goround that travels
fast, and with a calliope for music, and the children ride on cows with gilded horns, and
there are rings to catch with sticks, and there is the blue, gas-flare-lit early dark of the
Avenue du Maine, with fried fish sold from the next stall, and a wheel of fortune turning
with the leather flaps slapping against the posts of the numbered compartments, and the
packages of lump sugar piled in pyramids for prizes. No, it is not that kind of a merrygo-
round; although the people are waiting, like the men in caps and the women in knitted
sweaters, their heads bare in the gaslight and their hair shining, who stand in front of the
wheel of fortune as it spins. Yes, those are the people. But this is another wheel. This is
like a wheel that goes up and around.
It has been around twice now. It is a vast wheel, set at an angle, and each time it goes
around and then is back to where it starts. One side is higher than the other and the
sweep it makes lifts you back and down to where you started. There are no prizes
either, he thought, and no one would choose to ride this wheel. You ride it each time
and make the turn with no intention ever to have mounted. There is only one turn; one
large, elliptical, rising and falling turn and you are back where you have started. We are
back again now, he thought, and nothing is settled.
It was warm in the cave and the wind had dropped outside. Now he was sitting at the
table with his notebook in front of him figuring all the technical part of the bridge-blowing.
He drew three sketches, figured his formulas, marked the method of blowing with two
drawings as clearly as a kindergarten project so that Anselmo could complete it in case
anything should happen to himself during the process of the demolition. He finished
these sketches and studied them.
Maria sat beside him and looked over his shoulder while he worked. He was
conscious of Pablo across the table and of the others talking and playing cards and he
smelled the odors of the cave which had changed now from those of the meal and the
cooking to the fire smoke and man smell, the tobacco, red-wine and brassy, stale body
smell, and when Maria, watching him finishing a drawing, put her hand on the table he
picked it up with his left hand and lifted it to his face and smelled the coarse soap and
water freshness from her washing of the dishes. He laid her hand down without looking
at her and went on working and he could not see her blush. She let her hand lie there,
close to his, but he did not lift it again.
Now he had finished the demolition project and he took a new page of the notebook
and commenced to write out the operation orders. He was thinking clearly and well on
these and what he wrote pleased him. He wrote two pages in the notebook and read
them over carefully.
I think that is all, he said to himself. It is perfectly clear and I do not think there are any
holes in it. The two posts will be destroyed and the bridge will be blown according to“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway124
Golz’s orders and that is all of my responsibility. All of this business of Pablo is
something with which I should never have been saddled and it will be solved one way or
another. There will be Pablo or there will be no Pablo. I care nothing about it either way.
But I am not going to get on that wheel again. Twice I have been on that wheel and
twice it has gone around and come back to where it started and I am taking no more
rides on it.
He shut the notebook and looked up at Maria. “Hola, guapa,” he said to her. “Did you
make anything out of all that?”
“No, Roberto,” the girl said and put her hand on his hand that still held the pencil.
“Have you finished?”
“Yes. Now it is all written out and ordered.”
“What have you been doing, Inglés?” Pablo asked from across the table. His eyes
were bleary again.
Robert Jordan looked at him closely. Stay off that wheel, he said to himself. Don’t step
on that wheel. I think it is going to start to swing again.
“Working on the problem of the bridge,” he said civilly.
“How is it?” asked Pablo.
“Very good,” Robert Jordan said. “All very good.”
“I have been working on the problem of the retreat,” Pablo said and Robert Jordan
looked at his drunken pig eyes and at the wine bowl. The wine bowl was nearly empty.
Keep off the wheel, he told himself. He is drinking again. Sure. But don’t you get on
that wheel now. Wasn’t Grant supposed to be drunk a good part of the time during the
Civil War? Certainly he was. I’ll bet Grant would be furious at the comparison if he could
see Pablo. Grant was a cigar smoker, too. Well, he would have to see about getting
Pablo a cigar. That was what that face really needed to complete it; a half chewed cigar.
Where could he get Pablo a cigar?
“How does it go?” Robert Jordan asked politely.
“Very well,” Pablo said and nodded his head heavily and judiciously. “Muy bien.”
“You’ve thought up something?” Agustín asked from where they were playing cards.
“Yes,” Pablo said. “Various things.”
“Where did you find them? In that bowl?” Agustín demanded.
“Perhaps,” Pablo said. “Who knows? Maria, fill the bowl, will you, please?”
“In the wineskin itself there should be some fine ideas,” Agustín turned back to the
card game. “Why don’t you crawl in and look for them inside the skin?”
“Nay,” said Pablo equably. “I search for them in the bowl.”
He is not getting on the wheel either, Robert Jordan thought. It must be revolving by
itself. I suppose you cannot ride that wheel too long. That is probably quite a deadly
wheel. I’m glad we are off of it. It was making me dizzy there a couple of times. But it is
the thing that drunkards and those who are truly mean or cruel ride until they die. It goes
around and up and the swing is never quite the same and then it comes around down.
Let it swing, he thought. They will not get me onto it again. No sir, General Grant, I am
off that wheel.
Pilar was sitting by the fire, her chair turned so that she could see over the shoulders
of the two card players who had their backs to her. She was watching the game.
Here it is the shift from deadliness to normal family life that is the strangest, Robert
Jordan thought. It is when the damned wheel comes down that it gets you. But I am off
that wheel, he thought. And nobody is going to get me onto it again.
Two days ago I never knew that Pilar, Pablo nor the rest existed, he thought. There
was no such thing as Maria in the world. It was certainly a much simpler world. I had
instructions from Golz that were perfectly clear and seemed perfectly possible to carry
out although they presented certain difficulties and involved certain consequences. After
we blew the bridge I expected either to get back to the lines or not get back and if we
got back I was going to ask for some time in Madrid. No one has any leave in this war
but I am sure I could get two or three days in Madrid.
In Madrid I wanted to buy some books, to go to the Florida Hotel and get a room and“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway125
to have a hot bath, he thought. I was going to send Luis the porter out for a bottle of
absinthe if he could locate one at the MantequerIas Leonesas or at any of the places off
the Gran Via and I was going to lie in bed and read after the bath and drink a couple of
absinthes and then I was going to call up Gaylord’s and see if I could come up there and
eat.
He did not want to eat at the Gran Via because the food was no good really and you
had to get there on time or whatever there was of it would be gone. Also there were too
many newspaper men there he knew and he did not want to have to keep his mouth
shut. He wanted to drink the absinthes and to feel like talking and then go up to
Gaylord’s and eat with Karkov, where they had good food and real beer, and find out
what was going on in the war.
He had not liked Gaylord’s, the hotel in Madrid the Russians had taken over when he
first went there because it seemed too luxurious and the food was too good for a
besieged city and the talk too cynical for a war. But I corrupted very easily, he thought.
Why should you not have as good food as could be organized when you came back
from something like this? And the talk that he had thought of as cynicism when he had
first heard it had turned out to be much too true. This will be something to tell at
Gaylord’s, he thought, when this is over. Yes, when this is over.
Could you take Maria to Gaylord’s? No. You couldn’t. But you could leave her in the
hotel and she could take a hot bath and be there when you came back from Gaylord’s.
Yes, you could do that and after you had told Karkov about her, you could bring her later
because they would be curious about her and want to see her.
Maybe you wouldn’t go to Gaylord’s at all. You could eat early at the Gran Via and
hurry back to the Florida. But you knew you would go to Gaylord’s because you wanted
to see all that again; you wanted to eat that food again and you wanted to see all the
comfort of it and the luxury of it after this. Then you would come back to the Florida and
there Maria would be. Sure, she would be there after this was over. After this was over.
Yes, after this was over. If he did this well he would rate a meal at Gaylord’s.
Gaylord’s was the place where you met famous peasant and worker Spanish
commanders who had sprung to arms from the people at the start of the war without any
previous military training and found that many of them spoke Russian. That had been
the first big disillusion to him a few months back and he had started to be cynical to
himself about it. But when he realized how it happened it was all right. They were
peasants and workers. They had been active in the 1934 revolution and had to flee the
country when it failed and in Russia they had sent them to the military academy and to
the Lenin Institute the Comintern maintained so they would be ready to fight the next
time and have the necessary military education to command.
The Comintern had educated them there. In a revolution you could not admit to
outsiders who helped you nor that any one knew more than he was supposed to know.
He had learned that. If a thing was right fundamentally the lying was not supposed to
matter. There was a lot of lying though. He did not care for the lying at first. He hated it.
Then later he had come to like it. It was part of being an insider but it was a very
corrupting business.
It was at Gaylord’s that you learned that Valentin Gonzalez, called El Campesino or
The Peasant, had never been a peasant but was an ex-sergeant in the Spanish Foreign
Legion who had deserted and fought with Abd el Krim. That was all right, too. Why
shouldn’t he be? You had to have these peasant leaders quickly in this sort of war and a
real peasant leader might be a little too much like Pablo. You couldn’t wait for the real
Peasant Leader to arrive and he might have too many peasant characteristics when he
did. So you had to manufacture one. At that, from what he had seen of Campesino, with
his black beard, his thick negroid lips, and his feverish, staring eyes, he thought he
might give almost as much trouble as a real peasant leader. The last time he had seen
him he seemed to have gotten to believe his own publicity and think he was a peasant.
He was a brave, tough man; no braver in the world. But God, how he talked too much.
And when he was excited he would say anything no matter what the consequences of“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway126
his indiscretion. And those consequences had been many already. He was a wonderful
Brigade Commander though in a situation where it looked as though everything was
lost. He never knew when everything was lost and if it was, he would fight out of it.
At Gaylord’s, too, you met the simple stonemason, Enrique Lister from Galicia, who
now commanded a division and who talked Russian, too. And you met the cabinet
worker, Juan Modesto from AndalucIa who had just been given an Army Corps. He
never learned his Russian in Puerto de Santa Maria although he might have if they had
a Berlitz School there that the cabinet makers went to. He was the most trusted of the
young soldiers by the Russians because he was a true party man, “a hundred per cent”
they said, proud to use the Americanism. He was much more intelligent than Lister or El
Campesino.
Sure, Gaylord’s was the place you needed to complete your education. It was there
you learned how it was all really done instead of how it was supposed to be done. He
had only started his education, he thought. He wondered whether he would continue
with it long. Gaylord’s was good and sound and what he needed. At the start when he
had still believed all the nonsense it had come as a shock to him. But now he knew
enough to accept the necessity for all the deception and what he learned at Gaylord’s
only strengthened him in his belief in the things that he did hold to be true. He liked to
know how it really was; not how it was supposed to be. There was always lying in a war.
But the truth of Lister, Modesto, and El Campesino was much better than the lies and
legends. Well, some day they would tell the truth to every one and meantime he was
glad there was a Gaylord’s for his own learning of it.
Yes, that was where he would go in Madrid after he had bought the books and after he
had lain in the hot bath and had a couple of drinks and had read awhile. But that was
before Maria had come into all this that he had that plan. All right. They would have two
rooms and she could do what she liked while he went up there and he’d come back from
Gaylord’s to her. She had waited up in the hills all this time. She could wait a little while
at the Hotel Florida. They would have three days in Madrid. Three days could be a long
time. He’d take her to see the Marx Brothers at the Opera. That had been running for
three months now and would certainly be good for three months more. She’d like the
Marx Brothers at the Opera, he thought. She’d like that very much.
It was a long way from Gaylord’s to this cave though. No, that was not the long way.
The long way was going to be from this cave to Gaylord’s. Kashkin had taken him there
first and he had not liked it. Kashkin had said he should meet Karkov because Karkov
wanted to know Americans and because he was the greatest lover of Lope de Vega in
the world and thought “Fuente Ovejuna” was the greatest play ever written. Maybe it
was at that, but he, Robert Jordan, did not think so.
He had liked Karkov but not the place. Karkov was the most intelligent man he had
ever met. Wearing black riding boots, gray breeches, and a gray tunic, with tiny hands
and feet, puffily fragile of face and body, with a spitting way of talking through his bad
teeth, he looked comic when Robert Jordan first saw him. But he had more brains and
more inner dignity and outer insolence and humor than any man that he had ever
known.
Gaylord’s itself had seemed indecently luxurious and corrupt. But why shouldn’t the
representatives of a power that governed a sixth of the world have a few comforts? Well,
they had them and Robert Jordan had at first been repelled by the whole business and
then had accepted it and enjoyed it. Kashkin had made him out to be a hell of a fellow
and Karkov had at first been insultingly polite and then, when Robert Jordan had not
played at being a hero but had told a story that was really funny and obscenely
discreditable to himself, Karkov had shifted from the politeness to a relieved rudeness
and then to insolence and they had become friends.
Kashkin had only been tolerated there. There was something wrong with Kashkin
evidently and he was working it out in Spain. They would not tell him what it was but
maybe they would now that he was dead. Anyway, he and Karkov had become friends
and he had become friends too with the incredibly thin, drawn, dark, loving, nervous,“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway127
deprived and unbitter woman with a lean, neglected body and dark, gray-streaked hair
cut short who was Karkov’s wife and who served as an interpreter with the tank corps.
He was a friend too of Karkov’s mistress, who had cat-eyes, reddish gold hair
(sometimes more red; sometimes more gold, depending on the coiffeurs), a lazy
sensual body (made to fit well against other bodies), a mouth made to fit other mouths,
and a stupid, ambitious and utterly loyal mind. This mistress loved gossip and enjoyed a
periodically controlled promiscuity which seemed only to amuse Karkov. Karkov was
supposed to have another wife somewhere besides the tank-corps one, maybe two
more, but nobody was very sure about that. Robert Jordan liked both the wife he knew
and the mistress. He thought he would probably like the other wife, too, if he knew her, if
there was one. Karkov had good taste in women.
There were sentries with bayonets downstairs outside the portecochere at Gaylord’s
and tonight it would be the pleasantest and most comfortable place in all of besieged
Madrid. He would like to be there tonight instead of here. Though it was all right here,
now they had stopped that wheel. And the snow was stopping too.
He would like to show his Maria to Karkov but he could not take her there unless he
asked first and he would have to see how he was received after this trip. Golz would be
there after this attack was over and if he had done well they would all know it from Golz.
Golz would make fun of him, too, about Maria. After what he’d said to him about no girls.
He reached over to the bowl in front of Pablo and dipped up a cup of wine. “With your
permission,” he said.
Pablo nodded. He is engaged in his military studies, I imagine, Robert Jordan thought.
Not seeking the bubble reputation in the cannon’s mouth but seeking the solution to the
problem in yonder bowl. But you know the bastard must be fairly able to have run this
band successfully for as long as he did. Looking at Pablo he wondered what sort of
guerilla leader he would have been in the American Civil War. There were lots of them,
he thought. But we know very little about them. Not the Quantrills, nor the Mosbys, nor
his own grandfathei but the little ones, the bushwhackers. And about the drinking. Do
you suppose Grant really was a drunk? His grandfather always claimed he was. That he
was always a little drunk by four o’clock in the afternoon and that before Vicksburg
sometimes during the siege he was very drunk for a couple of days. But grandfather
claimed that he functioned perfectly normally no matter how much he drank except that
sometimes it was very hard to wake him. But if you could wake him he was normal.
There wasn’t any Grant, nor any Sherman nor any Stonewall Jackson on either side
so far in this war. No. Nor any Jeb Stuart either. Nor any Sheridan. It was overrun with
McClellans though. The fascists had plenty of McClellans and we had at least three of
them.
He had certainly not seen any military geniuses in this war. Not a one. Nor anything
resembling one. Kleber, Lucasz, and Hans had done a fine job of their share in the
defense of Madrid with the International Brigades and then the old bald, spectacled,
conceited, stupid-as-an-owl, unintelligent-in-conversation, brave— and-as-dumb-as-a-
bull, propaganda-build-up defender of Madrid, Miaja, had been so jealous of the
publicity Kleber received that he had forced the Russians to relieve Kieber of his
command and send him to Valencia. Kieber was a good soldier; but limited and he did
talk too much for the job he had. Golz was a good general and a fine soldier but they
always kept him in a subordinate position and never gave him a free hand. This attack
was going to be his biggest show so far and Robert Jordan did not like too much what
he had heard about the attack. Then there was Gall, the Hungarian, who ought to be
shot if you could believe half you heard at Gaylord’s. Make it if you can believe ten per
cent of what you hear at Gaylord’s, Robert Jordan thought.
He wished that he had seen the fighting on the plateau beyond Guadalajara when
they beat the Italians. But he had been down in Estremadura then. Hans had told him
about it one night in Gaylord’s two weeks ago and made him see it all. There was one
moment when it was really lost when the Italians had broken the line near Trijueque and
the Twelfth Brigade would have been cut off if the Torija-Brihuega road had been cut.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway128
“But knowing they were Italians,” Hans had said, “we attempted to manoeuvre which
would have been unjustifiable against other troops. And it was successful.”
Hans had shown it all to him on his maps of the battle. Hans carried them around with
him in his map case all the time and still seemed marvelled and happy at the miracle of
it. Hans was a fine soldier and a good companion. Lister’s and Modesto’s and
Campesino’s Spanish troops had all fought well in that battle, Hans had told him, and
that was to be credited to their leaders and to the discipline they enforced. But Lister
and Campesino and Modesto had been told many of the moves they should make by
their Russian military advisers. They were like students flying a machine with dual
controls which the pilot could take over whenever they made a mistake. Well, this year
would show how much and how well they learned. After a while there would not be dual
controls and then we would see how well they handled divisions and army corps alone.
They were Communists and they were disciplinarians. The discipline that they would
enforce would make good troops. Lister was murderous in discipline. He was a true
fanatic and he had the complete Spanish lack of respect for life. In a few armies since
the Tartar’s first invasion of the West were men executed summarily for as little reason
as they were under his command. But he knew how to forge a division into a fighting
unit. It is one thing to hold positions. It is another to attack positions and take them and it
is something very different to manoeuvre an army in the field, Robert Jordan thought as
he sat there at the table. From what I have seen of him, I wonder how Lister will be at
that once the dual controls are gone? But maybe they won’t go, he thought. I wonder if
they will go? Or whether they will strengthen? I wonder what the Russian stand is on the
whole business? Gaylord’s is the place, he thought. There is much that I need to know
now that I can learn only at Gaylord’s.
At one time he had thought Gaylord’s had been bad for him. It was the opposite of the
puritanical, religious communism of Velazquez 63, the Madrid palace that had been
turned into the International Brigade headquarters in the capital. At Velazquez 63 it was
like being a member of a religious order—and Gaylord’s was a long way away from the
feeling you had at the headquarters of the Fifth Regiment before it had been broken up
into the brigades of the new army.
At either of those places you felt that you were taking part in a crusade. That was the
only word for it although it was a word that had been so worn and abused that it no
longer gave its true meaning. You felt, in spite of all bureaucracy and inefficiency and
party strife, something that was like the feeling you expected to have and did not have
when you made your first communion. It was a feeling of consecration to a duty toward
all of the oppressed of the world which would be as difficult and embarrassing to speak
about as religious experience and yet it was authentic as the feeling you had when you
heard Bach, or stood in Chartres Cathedral or the Cathedral at Leon and saw the light
coming through the great windows; or when you saw Mantegna and Greco and
Brueghel in the Prado. It gave you a part in something that you could believe in wholly
and completely and in which you felt an absolute brotherhood with the others who were
engaged in it. It was something that you had never known before but that you had
experienced now and you gave such importance to it and the reasons for it that your
own death seemed of complete unimportance; only a thing to be avoided because it
would interfere with the performance of your duty. But the best thing was that there was
something you could do about this feeling and this necessity too. You could fight.
So you fought, he thought. And in the fighting soon there was no purity of feeling for
those who survived the fighting and were good at it. Not after the first six months.
The defense of a position or of a city is a part of war in which you can feel that first
sort of feeling. The fighting in the Sierras had been that way. They had fought there with
the true comradeship of the revolution. Up there when there had been the first necessity
for the enforcement of discipline he had approved and understood it. Under the shelling
men had been cowards and had run. He had seen them shot and left to swell beside the
road, nobody bothering to do more than strip them of their cartridges and their
valuables. Taking their cartridges, their boots and their leather coats was right. Taking“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway129
the valuables was only realistic. It only kept the anarchists from getting them.
It had seemed just and right and necessary that the men who ran were shot. There
was nothing wrong about it. Their running was a selfishness. The fascists had attacked
and we had stopped them on that slope in the gray rocks, the scrub pines and the gorse
of the Guadarrama hillsides. We had held along the road under the bombing from the
planes and the shelling when they brought their artillery up and those who were left at
the end of that day had counterattacked and driven them back. Later, when they had
tried to come down on the left, sifting down between the rocks and through the trees, we
had held out in the Sanitarium firing from the windows and the roof although they had
passed it on both sides, and we lived through knowing what it was to be surrounded
until the counterattack had cleared them back behind the road again.
In all that, in the fear that dries your mouth and your throat, in the smashed plaster
dust and the sudden panic of a wall falling, collapsing in the flash and roar of a
shellburst, clearing the gun, dragging those away who had been serving it, lying face
downward and covered with rubble, your head behind the shield working on a stoppage,
getting the broken case out, straightening the belt again, you now lying straight behind
the shield, the gun searching the roadside again; you did the thing there was to do and
knew that you were right. You learned the dry-mouthed, fear-purged, purging ecstasy of
battle and you fought that summer and that fall for all the poor in the world, against all
tyranny, for all the things that you believed and for the new world you had been
educated into. You learned that fall, he thought, how to endure and how to ignore
suffering in the long time of cold and wetness, of mud and of digging and fortifying. And
the feeling of the summer and the fall was buried deep under tiredness, sleepiness, and
nervousness and discomfort. But it was still there and all that you went through only
served to validate it. It was in those days, he thought, that you had a deep and sound
and selfless pride—that would have made you a bloody bore at Gaylord’s, he thought
suddenly.
No, you would not have been so good at Gaylord’s then, he thought. You were too
naïve. You were in a sort of state of grace. But Gaylord’s might not have been the way it
was now at that time, either. No, as a matter of fact, it was not that way, he told himself.
It was not that way at all. There was not any Gaylord’s then.
Karkov had told him about those days. At that time what Russians there were had
lived at the Palace Hotel. Robert Jordan had known none of them then. That was before
the first partizan groups had been formed; before he had met Kashkin or any of the
others. Kashkin had been in the north at Irun, at San Sebastian and in the abortive
fighting toward Vitoria. He had not arrived in Madrid until January and while Robert
Jordan had fought at Carabanchel and at Usera in those three days when they stopped
the right wing of the fascist attack on Madrid and drove the Moors and the Tercio back
from house to house to clear that battered suburb on the edge of the gray, sun-baked
plateau and establish a line of defense along the heights that would protect that corner
of the city, Karkov had been in Madrid.
Karkov was not cynical about those times either when he talked. Those were the days
they all shared when everything looked lost and each man retained now, better than any
citation or decoration, the knowledge of just how he would act when everything looked
lost. The government had abandoned the city, taking all the motor cars from the ministry
of war in their flight and old Miaja had to ride down to inspect his defensive positions on
a bicycle. Robert Jordan did not believe that one. He could not see Miaja on a bicycle
even in his most patriotic imagination, but Karkov said it was true. But then he had
written it for Russian papers so he probably wanted to believe it was true after writing it.
But there was another story that Karkov had not written. He had three wounded
Russians in the Palace Hotel for whom he was responsible. They were two tank drivers
and a flyer who were too bad to be moved, and since, at that time, it was of the greatest
importance that there should be no evidence of any Russian intervention to justify an
open intervention by the fascists, it was Karkov’s responsibility that these wounded
should not fall into the hands of the fascists in case the city should be abandoned.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway130
In the event the city should be abandoned, Karkov was to poison them to destroy all
evidence of their identity before leaving the Palace Hotel. No one could prove from the
bodies of three wounded men, one with three bullet wounds in his abdomen, one with
his jaw shot away and his vocal cords exposed, one with his femur smashed to bits by a
bullet and his hands and face so badly burned that his face was just an eyelashless,
eyebrowless, hairless blister that they were Russians. No one could tell from the bodies
of these wounded men he would leave in beds at the Palace, that they were Russians.
Nothing proved a naked dead man was a Russian. Your nationality and your politics did
not show when you were dead.
Robert Jordan had asked Karkov how he felt about the necessity of performing this act
and Karkov had said that he had not looked forward to it. “How were you going to do it?”
Robert Jordan had asked him and had added, “You know it isn’t so simple just suddenly
to poison people.” And Karkov had said, “Oh, yes, it is when you carry it always for your
own use.” Then he had opened his cigarette case and showed Robert Jordan what he
carried in one side of it.
“But the first thing anybody would do if they took you prisoner would be to take your
cigarette case,” Robert Jordan had objected. “They would have your hands up.”
“But I have a little more here,” Karkov had grinned and showed the lapel of his jacket.
“You simply put the lapel in your mouth like this and bite it and swallow.”
“That’s much better,” Robert Jordan had said. “Tell me, does it smell like bitter
almonds the way it always does in detective stories?”
“I don’t know,” Karkov said delightedly. “I have never smelled it. Should we break a
little tube and smell it?”
“Better keep it.”
“Yes,” Karkov said and put the cigarette case away. “I am not a defeatist, you
understand, but it is always possible that such serious times might come again and you
cannot get this anywhere. Have you seen the communiqué from the Córdoba front? It is
very beautiful. It is now my favorite among all the communiqués.”
“What did it say?” Robert Jordan had come to Madrid from the Córdoban Front and he
had the sudden stiffening that comes when some one jokes about a thing which you
yourself may joke about but which they may not. “Tell me?”
“Nuestra gloriosa tropa siga avanzando sin perder ni una sola palma de terreno,”
Karkov said in his strange Spanish.
“It didn’t really say that,” Robert Jordan doubted.
“Our glorious troops continue to advance without losing a foot of ground,” Karkov
repeated in English. “It is in the communiqué. I will find it for you.”
You could remember the men you knew who died in the fighting around Pozoblanco;
but it was a joke at Gaylord’s.
So that was the way it was at Gaylord’s now. Still there had not always been Gaylord’s
and if the situation was now one which produced such a thing as Gaylord’s out of the
survivors of the early days, he was glad to see Gaylord’s and to know about it. You are
a long way from how you felt in the Sierra and at Carabanchel and at Usera, he thought.
You corrupt very easily, he thought. But was it corruption or was it merely that you lost
the naïveté that you started with? Would it not be the same in anything? Who else kept
that first chastity of mind about their work that young doctors, young priests, and young
soldiers usually started with? The priests certainly kept it, or they got out. I suppose the
Nazis keep it, he thought, and the Communists who have a severe enough
selfdiscipline. But look at Karkov.
He never tired of considering the case of Karkov. The last time he had been at
Gaylord’s Karkov had been wonderful about a certain British economist who had spent
much time in Spain. Robert Jordan had read this man’s writing for years and he had
always respected him without knowing anything about him. He had not cared very much
for what this man had written about Spain. It was too clear and simple and too open and
shut and many of the statistics he knew were faked by wishful thinking. But he thought
you rarely cared for journalism written about a country you really knew about and he“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway131
respected the man for his intentions.
Then he had seen the man, finally, on the afternoon when they had attacked at
Carabanchel.They were sitting in the lee of the bull ring and there was shooting down
the two streets and every one was nervous waiting for the attack. A tank had been
promised and it had not come up and Montero was sitting with his head in his hand
saying, “The tank has not come. The tank has not come.”
It was a cold day and the yellow dust was blowing down the street and Montero had
been hit in the left arm and the arm was stiffening. “We have to have a tank,” he said.
“We must wait for the tank, but we cannot wait.” His wound was making him sound
petulant.
Robert Jordan had gone back to look for the tank which Montero said he thought
might have stopped behind the apartment building on the corner of the tram-line. It was
there all right. But it was not a tank. Spaniards called anything a tank in those days. It
was an old armored car. The driver did not want to leave the angle of the apartment
house and bring it up to the bull ring. He was standing behind it with his arms folded
against the metal of the car and his head in the leather-padded helmet on his arms. He
shook his head when Robert Jordan spoke to him and kept it pressed against his arms.
Then he turned his head without looking at Robert Jordan.
“I have no orders to go there,” he said sullenly.
Robert Jordan had taken his pistol out of the holster and pushed the muzzle of the
pistol against the leather coat of the armored car driver.
“Here are your orders,” he had told him. The man shook his head with the big padded-
leather helmet like a football player’s on it and said, “There is no ammunition for the
machine gun.”
“We have ammunition at the bull ring,” Robert Jordan had told him. “Come on, let’s go.
We will fill the belts there. Come on.”
“There is no one to work the gun,” the driver said.
“Where is he? Where is your mate?”
“Dead,” the driver had said. “Inside there.”
“Get him out,” Robert Jordan had said. “Get him out of there.”
“I do not like to touch him,” the driver had said. “And he is bent over between the gun
and the wheel and I cannot get past him.”
“Come on,” Robert Jordan had said. “We will get him out together.”
He had banged his head as he climbed into the armored car and it had made a small
cut over his eyebrow that bled down onto his face. The dead man was heavy and so stiff
you could not bend him and he had to hammer at his head to get it out from where it had
wedged, face down, between his seat and the wheel. Finally he got it up by pushing with
his knee up under the dead man’s head and then, pulling back on the man’s waist now
that the head was loose, he pulled the dead man out himself toward the door.
“Give me a hand with him,” he had said to the driver.
“I do not want to touch him,” the driver had said and Robert Jordan had seen that he
was crying. The tears ran straight down on each side of his nose on the powder-grimed
slope of his face and his nose was running, too.
Standing beside the door he had swung the dead man out and the dead man fell onto
the sidewalk beside the tram-line still in that hunched-over, doubled-up position. He lay
there, his face waxy gray against the cement sidewalk, his hands bent under him as
they had been in the car.
“Get in, God damn it,” Robert Jordan had said, motioning now with his pistol to the
driver. “Get in there now.”
Just then he had seen this man who had come out from the lee of the apartment
house building. He had on a long overcoat and he was bareheaded and his hair was
gray, his cheekbones broad and his eyes were deep and set close together. He had a
package of Chesterfields in his hand and he took one out and handed it toward Robert
Jordan who was pushing the driver into the armored car with his pistol.
“Just a minute, Comrade,” he had said to Robert Jordan in Spanish. “Can you explain“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway132
to me something about the fighting?”
Robert Jordan took the cigarette and put it in the breast pocket of his blue mechanic
jumper. He had recognized this comrade from his pictures. It was the British economist.
“Go muck yourself,” he said in English and then, in Spanish, to the armored car driver.
“Down there. The bull ring. See?” And he had pulled the heavy side door to with a slam
and locked it and they had started down that long slope in the car and the bullets had
commenced to hit against the car, sounding like pebbles tossed against an iron boiler.
Then when the machine gun opened on them, they were like sharp hammer tappings.
They had pulled up behind the shelter of the bull ring with the last October posters still
pasted up beside the ticket window and the ammunition boxes knocked open and the
comrades with the rifles, the grenades on their belts and in their pockets, waiting there
in the lee and Montero had said, “Good. Here is the tank. Now we can attack.”
Later that night when they had the last houses on the hill, he lay comfortable behind a
brick wall with a hole knocked in the bricks for a loophole and looked across the
beautiful level field of fire they had between them and the ridge the fascists had retired
to and thought, with a comfort that was almost voluptuous, of the rise of the hill with the
smashed villa that protected the left flank. He had lain in a pile of straw in his sweat-
soaked clothes and wound a blanket around him while he dried. Lying there he thought
of the economist and laughed, and then felt sorry he had been rude. But at the moment,
when the man had handed him the cigarette, pushing it out almost like offering a tip for
information, the combatant’s hatred for the noncombatant had been too much for him.
Now he remembered Gaylord’s and Karkov speaking of this same man. “So it was
there you met him,” Karkov had said. “I did not get farther than the Puente de Toledo
myself on that day. He was very far toward the front. That was the last day of his
bravery I believe. He left Madrid the next day. Toledo was where he was the bravest, I
believe. At Toledo he was enormous. He was one of the architects of our capture of the
Alcazar. You should have seen him at Toledo. I believe it was largely through his efforts
and his advice that our siege was successful. That was the silliest part of the war. It
reached an ultimate in silliness but tell me, what is thought of him in America?”
“In America,” Robert Jordan said, “he is supposed to be very close to Moscow.”
“He is not,” said Karkov. “But he has a wonderful face and his face and his manners
are very successful. Now with my face I could do nothing. What little I have
accomplished was all done in spite of my face which does not either inspire people nor
move them to love me and to trust me. But this man Mitchell has a face he makes his
fortune with. It is the face of a conspirator. All who have read of conspirators in books
trust him instantly. Also he has the true manner of the conspirator. Any one seeing him
enter a room knows that he is instantly in the presence of a conspirator of the first mark.
All of your rich compatriots who wish sentimentally to aid the Soviet Union as they
believe or to insure themselves a little against any eventual success of the party see
instantly in the face of this man, and in his manner that he can be none other than a
trusted agent of the Comintern.”
“Has he no connections in Moscow?”
“None. Listen, Comrade Jordan. Do you know about the two kinds of fools?”
“Plain and damn?”
“No. The two kinds of fools we have in Russia,” Karkov grinned and began. “First there
is the winter fool. The winter fool comes to the door of your house and he knocks loudly.
You go to the door and you see him there and you have never seen him before. He is
an impressive sight. He is a very big man and he has on high boots and a fur coat and a
fur hat and he is all covered with snow. First he stamps his boots and snow falls from
them. Then he takes off his fur coat and shakes it and more snow falls. Then he takes
off his fur hat and knocks it against the door. More snow falls from his fur hat. Then he
stamps his boots again and advances into the room. Then you look at him and you see
he is a fool. That is the winter fool.
“Now in the summer you see a fool going down the street and he is waving his arms
and jerking his head from side to side and everybody from two hundred yards away can“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway133
tell he is a fool. That is a summer fool. This economist is a winter fool.”
“But why do people trust him here?” Robert Jordan asked.
“His face,” Karkov said. “His beautiful gueule de conspirateur. And his invaluable trick
of just having come from somewhere else where he is very trusted and important. Of
course,” he smiled, “he must travel very much to keep the trick working. You know the
Spanish are very strange,” Karkov went on. “This government has had much money.
Much gold. They will give nothing to their friends. You are a friend. All right. You will do it
for nothing and should not be rewarded. But to people representing an important firm or
a country which is not friendly but must be influenced—to such people they give much. It
is very interesting when you follow it closely.”
“I do not like it. Also that money belongs to the Spanish workers.”
“You are not supposed to like things. Only to understand,” Karkov had told him. “I
teach you a little each time I see you and eventually you will acquire an education. It
would be very interesting for a professor to be educated.”
“I don’t know whether I’ll be able to be a professor when I get back. They will probably
run me out as a Red.”
“Well, perhaps you will be able to come to the Soviet Union and continue your studies
there. That might be the best thing for you to do.”
“But Spanish is my field.”
“There are many countries where Spanish is spoken,” Karkov had said. “They cannot
all be as difficult to do anything with as Spain is. Then you must remember that you
have not been a professor now for almost nine months. In nine months you may have
learned a new trade. How much dialectics have you read?”
“I have read the Handbook of Marxism that Emil Burns edited. That is all.”
“If you have read it all that is quite a little. There are fifteen hundred pages and you
could spend some time on each page. But there are some other things you should
read.”
“There is no time to read now.”
“I know,” Karkov had said. “I mean eventually. There are many things to read which
will make you understand some of these things that happen. But out of this will come a
book which is very necessary; which will explain many things which it is necessary to
know. Perhaps I will write it. I hope that it will be me who will write it.”
“I don’t know who could write it better.”
“Do not flatter,” Karkov had said. “I am a journalist. But like all journalists I wish to
write literature. Just now, I am very busy on a study of Calvo Sotelo. He was a very
good fascist; a true Spanish fascist. Franco and these other people are not. I have been
studying all of Sotelo’s writing and speeches. He was very intelligent and it was very
intelligent that he was killed.”
“I thought that you did not believe in political assassination.”
“It is practised very extensively,” Karkov said. “Very, very extensively.”
“But—”
“We do not believe in acts of terrorism by individuals,” Karkov had smiled. “Not of
course by criminal terrorist and counterrevolutionary organizations. We detest with
horror the duplicity and villainy of the murderous hyenas of Bukharinite wreckers and
such dregs of humanity as Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rykov and their henchmen. We hate
and loathe these veritable fiends,” he smiled again. “But I still believe that political
assassination can be said to be practised very extensively.”
“You mean—”
“I mean nothing. But certainly we execute and destroy such veritable fiends and dregs
of humanity and the treacherous dogs of generals and the revolting spectacle of
admirals unfaithful to their trust. These are destroyed. They are not assassinated. You
see the difference?”
“I see,” Robert Jordan had said.
“And because I make jokes sometime: and you know how dangerous it is to make
jokes even in joke? Good. Because I make jokes, do not think that the Spanish people“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway134
will not live to regret that they have not shot certain generals that even now hold
commands. I do not like the shootings, you understand.”
“I don’t mind them,” Robert Jordan said. “I do not like them but I do not mind them any
more.”
“I know that,” Karkov had said. “I have been told that.”
“Is it important?” Robert Jordan said. “I was only trying to be truthful about it.”
“It is regretful,” Karkov had said. “But it is one of the things that makes people be
treated as reliable who would ordinarily have to spend much more time before attaining
that category.”
“Am I supposed to be reliable?”
“In your work you are supposed to be very reliable. I must talk to you sometime to see
how you are in your mind. It is regrettable that we never speak seriously.”
“My mind is in suspension until we win the war,” Robert Jordan had said.
“Then perhaps you will not need it for a long time. But you should be careful to
exercise it a little.”
“I read Mundo Obrero,” Robert Jordan had told him and Karkov had said, “All right.
Good. I can take a joke too. But there are very intelligent things in Mundo Obrero. The
only intelligent things written on this war.”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan had said. “I agree with you. But to get a full picture of what is
happening you cannot read only the party organ.”
“No,” Karkov had said. “But you will not find any such picture if you read twenty papers
and then, if you had it, I do not know what you would do with it. I have such a picture
almost constantly and what I do is try to forget it.”
“You think it is that bad?”
“It is better now than it was. We are getting rid of some of the worst. But it is very
rotten. We are building a huge army now and some of the elements, those of Modesto,
of El Campesino, of Lister and of Durán, are reliable. They are more than reliable. They
are magnificent. You will see that. Also we still have the Brigades although their role is
changing. But an army that is made up of good and bad elements cannot win a war. All
must be brought to a certain level of political development; all must know why they are
fighting, and its importance. All must believe in the fight they are to make and all must
accept discipline. We are making a huge conscript army without the time to implant the
discipline that a conscript army must have, to behave properly under fire. We call it a
people’s army but it will not have the assets of a true people’s army and it will not have
the iron discipline that a conscript army needs. You will see. It is a very dangerous
procedure.”
“You are not very cheerful today.”
“No,” Karkov had said. “I have just come back from Valencia where I have seen many
people. No one comes back very cheerful from Valencia. In Madrid you feel good and
clean and with no possibility of anything but winning. Valencia is something else. The
cowards who fled from Madrid still govern there. They have settled happily into the sloth
and bureaucracy of governing. They have only contempt for those of Madrid. Their
obsession now is the weakening of the commissariat for war. And Barcelona. You
should see Barcelona.”
“How is it?”
“It is all still comic opera. First it was the paradise of the crackpots and the romantic
revolutionists. Now it is the paradise of the fake soldier. The soldiers who like to wear
uniforms, who like to strut and swagger and wear red-and-black scarves. Who like
everything about war except to fight. Valencia makes you sick and Barcelona makes
you laugh.”
“What about the P.O.U.M. putsch?”
“The P.O.U.M. was never serious. It was a heresy of crackpots and wild men and it
was really just an infantilism. There were some honest misguided people. There was
one fairly good brain and there was a little fascist money. Not much. The poor P.O.U.M.
They were very silly people.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway135
“But were many killed in the putsch?”
“Not so many as were shot afterwards or will be shot. The P.O.U.M. It is like the name.
Not serious. They should have called it the M.U.M.P.S. or the M.E.A.S.L.E.S. But no.
The Measles is much more dangerous. It can affect both sight and hearing. But they
made one plot you know to kill me, to kill Walter, to kill Modesto and to kill Prieto. You
see how badly mixed up they were? We are not at all alike. Poor P.O.U.M. They never
did kill anybody. Not at the front nor anywhere else. A few in Barcelona, yes.”
“Were you there?”
“Yes. I have sent a cable describing the wickedness of that infamous organization of
Trotskyite murderers and their fascist machinations all beneath contempt but, between
us, it is not very serious, the P.O.U.M. Nin was their only man. We had him but he
escaped from our hands.”
“Where is he now?”
“In Paris. We say he is in Paris. He was a very pleasant fellow but with bad political
aberrations.”
“But they were in communication with the fascists, weren’t they?”
“Who is not?”
“We are not.”
“Who knows? I hope we are not. You go often behind their lines,” he grinned. “But the
brother of one of the secretaries of the Republican Embassy at Paris made a trip to St.
Jean de Luz last week to meet people from Burgos.”
“I like it better at the front,” Robert Jordan had said. “The closer to the front the better
the people.”
“How do you like it behind the fascist lines?”
“Very much. We have fine people there.”
“Well, you see they must have their fine people behind our lines the same way. We
find them and shoot them and they find ours and shoot them. When you are in their
country you must always think of how many people they must send over to us.”
“I have thought about them.”
“Well,” Karkov had said. “You have probably enough to think about for today, so drink
that beer that is left in the pitcher and run along now because I have to go upstairs to
see people. Upstairs people. Come again to see me soon.”
Yes, Robert Jordan thought. You learned a lot at Gaylord’s. Karkov had read the one
and only book he had published. The book had not been a success. It was only two
hundred pages long and he doubted if two thousand people had ever read it. He had put
in it what he had discovered about Spain in ten years of travelling in it, on foot, in third-
class carriages, by bus, on horse- and mule-back and in trucks. He knew the Basque
country, Navarre, Aragon, Galicia, the two Castiles and Estremadura well. There had
been such good books written by Borrow and Ford and the rest that he had been able to
add very little. But Karkov said it was a good book.
“It is why I bother with you,” he said. “I think you write absolutely truly and that is very
rare. So I would like you to know some things.”
All right. He would write a book when he got through with this. But only about the
things he knew, truly, and about what he knew. But I will have to be a much better writer
than I am now to handle them, he thought. The things he had come to know in this war
were not so simple.
19
“What do you do sitting there?” Maria asked him. She was standing close beside him
and he turned his head and smiled at her.
“Nothing,” he said. “I have been thinking.”
“What of? The bridge?”
“No. The bridge is terminated. Of thee and of a hotel in Madrid where I know some
Russians, and of a book I will write some time.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway136
“Are there many Russians in Madrid?”
“No. Very few.”
“But in the fascist periodicals it says there are hundreds of thousands.”
“Those are lies. There are very few.”
“Do you like the Russians? The one who was here was a Russian.”
“Did you like him?”
“Yes. I was sick then but I thought he was very beautiful and very brave.”
“What nonsense, beautiful,” Pilar said. “His nose was flat as my hand and he had
cheekbones as wide as a sheep’s buttocks.”
“He was a good friend and comrade of mine,” Robert Jordan said to Maria. “I cared for
him very much.”
“Sure,” Pilar said. “But you shot him.”
When she said this the card players looked up from the table and Pablo stared at
Robert Jordan. Nobody said anything and then the gypsy, Rafael, asked, “Is it true,
Roberto?”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said. He wished Pilar had not brought this up and he wished he
had not told it at El Sordo’s. “At his request. He was badly wounded.”
“Qué cosa mas rara,” the gypsy said. “All the time he was with us he talked of such a
possibility. I don’t know how many times I have promised him to perform such an act.
What a rare thing,” he said again and shook his head.
“He was a very rare man,” Primitivo said. “Very singular.”
“Look,” Andrés, one of the brothers, said. “You who are Professor and all. Do you
believe in the possibility of a man seeing ahead what is to happen to him?”
“I believe he cannot see it,” Robert Jordan said. Pablo was staring at him curiously
and Pilar was watching him with no expression on her face. “In the case of this Russian
comrade he was very nervous from being too much time at the front. He had fought at
Irun which, you know, was bad. Very bad. He had fought later in the north. And since
the first groups who did this work behind the lines were formed he had worked here, in
Estremadura and in AndalucIa. I think he was very tired and nervous and he imagined
ugly things.”
“He would undoubtedly have seen many evil things,” Fernando said.
“Like all the world,” Andrés said. “But listen to me, Inglés. Do you think there is such a
thing as a man knowing in advance what will befall him?”
“No,” Robert Jordan said. “That is ignorance and superstition.”
“Go on,” Pilar said. “Let us hear the viewpoint of the professor.” She spoke as though
she were talking to a precocious child.
“I believe that fear produces evil visions,” Robert Jordan said. “Seeing bad signs—”
“Such as the airplanes today,” Primitivo said.
“Such as thy arrival,” Pablo said softly and Robert Jordan looked across the table at
him, saw it was not a provocation but only an expressed thought, then went on. “Seeing
bad signs, one, with fear, imagines an end for himself and one thinks that imagining
comes by divination,” Robert Jordan concluded. “I believe there is nothing more to it
than that. I do not believe in ogres, nor soothsayers, nor in the supernatural things.”
“But this one with the rare name saw his fate clearly,” the gypsy said. “And that was
how it happened.”
“He did not see it,” Robert Jordan said. “He had a fear of such a possibility and it
became an obsession. No one can tell me that he saw anything.”
“Not I?” Pilar asked him and picked some dust up from the fire and blew it off the palm
of her hand. “I cannot tell thee either?”
“No. With all wizardry, gypsy and all, thou canst not tell me either.”
“Because thou art a miracle of deafness,” Pilar said, her big face harsh and broad in
the candlelight. “It is not that thou art stupid. Thou art simply deaf. One who is deaf
cannot hear music. Neither can he hear the radio. So he might say, never having heard
them, that such things do not exist. Qué va, Inglés. I saw the death of that one with the
rare name in his face as though it were burned there with a branding iron.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway137
“You did not,” Robert Jordan insisted. “You saw fear and apprehension. The fear was
made by what he had been through. The apprehension was for the possibility of evil he
imagined.”
“Qué va,” Pilar said. “I saw death there as plainly as though it were sitting on his
shoulder. And what is more he smelt of death.”
“He smelt of death,” Robert Jordan jeered. “Of fear maybe. There is a smell to fear.”
“De la muerte,” Pilar said. “Listen. When Blanquet, who was the greatest peon de
brega who ever lived, worked under the orders of Granero he told me that on the day of
Manolo Granero’s death, when they stopped in the chapel on the way to the ring, the
odor of death was so strong on Manolo that it almost made Blanquet sick. And he had
been with Manolo when he had bathed and dressed at the hotel before setting out for
the ring. The odor was not present in the motorcar when they had sat packed tight
together riding to the bull ring. Nor was it distinguishable to any one else but Juan Luis
de la Rosa in the chapel. Neither Marcial nor Chicuelo smelled it neither then nor when
the four of them lined up for the paseo. But Juan Luis was dead white, Blanquet told me,
and he, Blanquet, spoke to him saying, ‘Thou also?’
“‘So that I cannot breathe,’ Juan Luis said to him. ‘And from thy matador.’
“‘Pues nada,’ Blanquet said. ‘There is nothing to do. Let us hope we are mistaken.’
“‘And the others?’ Juan Luis asked Blanquet.
“‘Nada,’ Blanquet said. ‘Nothing. But this one stinks worse than José at Talavera.’
“And it was on that afternoon that the bull Pocapena of the ranch of Veragua
destroyed Manolo Granero against the planks of the barrier in front of tendido two in the
Plaza de Toros of Madrid. I was there with Finito and I saw it. The horn entirely
destroyed the cranium, the head of Manolo being wedged under the estribo at the base
of the barrera where the bull had tossed him.”
“But did you smell anything?” Fernando asked.
“Nay,” Pilar said. “I was too far away. We were in the seventh row of the tendido three.
It was thus, being at an angle, that I could see all that happened. But that same night
Blanquet who had been under the orders of Joselito when he too was killed told Finito
about it at Fornos, and Finito asked Juan Luis de la Rosa and he would say nothing. But
he nodded his head that it was true. I was present when this happened. So, Inglés, it
may be that thou art deaf to some things as Chicuelo and Marcial Lalanda and all of
their banderilleros and picadors and all of the gente of Juan Luis and Manolo Granero
were deaf to this thing on this day. But Juan Luis and Blanquet were not deaf. Nor am I
deaf to such things.”
“Why do you say deaf when it is a thing of the nose?” Fernando asked.
“Leche!” Pilar said. “Thou shouldst be the professor in place of the Inglés. But I could
tell thee of other things, Inglés, and do not doubt what thou simply cannot see nor
cannot hear. Thou canst not hear what a dog hears. Nor canst thou smell what a dog
smells. But already thou hast experienced a little of what can happen to man.”
Maria put her hand on Robert Jordan’s shoulder and let it rest there and he thought
suddenly, let us finish all this nonsense and take advantage of what time we have. But it
is too early yet. We have to kill this part of the evening. So he said to Pablo, “Thou,
believest thou in this wizardry?”
“I do not know,” Pablo said. “I am more of thy opinion. No supernatural thing has ever
happened to me. But feai yes certainly. Plenty. But I believe that the Pilar can divine
events from the hand. If she does not lie perhaps it is true that she has smelt such a
thing.”
“Qué va that I should lie,” Pilar said. “This is not a thing of my invention. This man
Blanquet was a man of extreme seriousness and furthermore very devout. He was no
gypsy but a bourgeois from Valencia. Hast thou never seen him?”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “I have seen him many times. He was small, gray-faced
and no one handled a cape better. He was quick on his feet as a rabbit.”
“Exactly,” Pilar said. “He had a gray face from heart trouble and gypsies said that he
carried death with him but that he could flick it away with a cape as you might dust a“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway138
table. Yet he, who was no gypsy, smelled death on Joselito when he fought at Talavera.
Although I do not see how he could smell it above the smell of manzanilla. Blanquet
spoke of this afterwards with much diffidence but those to whom he spoke said that it
was a fantasy and that what he had smelled was the life that José led at that time
coming out in sweat from his armpits. But then, later, came this of Manolo Granero in
which Juan Luis de la Rosa also participated. Clearly Juan Luis was a man of very little
honor, but of much sensitiveness in his work and he was also a great layer of women.
But Blanquet was serious and very quiet and completely incapable of telling an untruth.
And I tell you that I smelled death on your colleague who was here.”
“I do not believe it,” Robert Jordan said. “Also you said that Blanquet smelled this just
before the paseo. Just before the bullfight started. Now this was a successful action
here of you and Kashkin and the train. He was not killed in that. How could you smell it
then?”
“That has nothing to do with it,” Pilar explained. “In the last season of Ignacio Sanchez
Mejias he smelled so strongly of death that many refused to sit with him in the café. All
gypsies knew of this.”
“After the death such things are invented,” Robert Jordan argued. “Every one knew
that Sanchez Mejias was on the road to a cornada because he had been too long out of
training, because his style was heavy and dangerous, and because his strength and the
agility in his legs were gone and his reflexes no longer as they had been.”
“Certainly,” Pilar told him. “All of that is true. But all the gypsies knew also that he
smelled of death and when he would come into the Villa Rosa you would see such
people as Ricardo and Felipe Gonzalez leaving by the small door behind the bar.”
“They probably owed him money,” Robert Jordan said.
“It is possible,” Pilar said. “Very possible. But they also smelled the thing and all knew
of it.”
“What she says is true, Inglés,” the gypsy, Rafael, said. “It is a well-known thing
among us.”
“I believe nothing of it,” Robert Jordan said.
“Listen, Inglés,” Anselmo began. “I am against all such wizardry. But this Pilar has the
fame of being very advanced in such things.”
“But what does it smell like?” Fernando asked. “What odor has it? If there be an odor it
must be a definite odor.”
“You want to know, Fernandito?” Pilar smiled at him. “You think that you could smell
it?”
“If it actually exists why should I not smell it as well as another?”
“Why not?” Pilar was making fun of him, her big hands folded across her knees. “Hast
thou ever been aboard a ship, Fernando?”
“Nay. And I would not wish to.”
“Then thou might not recognize it. For part of it is the smell that comes when, on a
ship, there is a storm and the portholes are closed up. Put your nose against the brass
handle of a screwed-tight porthole on a rolling ship that is swaying under you so that you
are faint and hollow in the stomach and you have a part of that smell.”
“It would be impossible for me to recognize because I will go on no ship,” Fernando
said.
“I have been on ships several times,” Pilar said. “Both to go to Mexico and to
Venezuela.”
“What’s the rest of it?” Robert Jordan asked. Pilar looked at him mockingly,
remembering now, proudly, her voyages.
“All right, Inglés. Learn. That’s the thing. Learn. All right. After that of the ship you must
go down the hill in Madrid to the Puente de Toledo early in the morning to the matadero
and stand there on the wet paving when there is a fog from the Manzanares and wait for
the old women who go before daylight to drink the blood of the beasts that are
slaughtered. When such an old woman comes out of the matadero, holding her shawl
around hei with her face gray and her eyes hollow, and the whiskers of age on her chin,“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway139
and on her cheeks, set in the waxen white of her face as the sprouts grow from the seed
of the bean, not bristles, but pale sprouts in the death of her face; put your arms tight
around her, Inglés, and hold her to you and kiss her on the mouth and you will know the
second part that odor is made of.”
“That one has taken my appetite,” the gypsy said. “That of the sprouts was too much.”
“Do you want to hear some more?” Pilar asked Robert Jordan.
“Surely,” he said. “If it is necessary for one to learn let us learn.”
“That of the sprouts in the face of the old women sickens me,” the gypsy said. “Why
should that occur in old women, Pilar? With us it is not so.”
“Nay,” Pilar mocked at him. “With us the old woman, who was so slender in her youth,
except of course for the perpetual bulge that is the mark of her husband’s favor, that
every gypsy pushes always before her—”
“Do not speak thus,” Rafael said. “It is ignoble.”
“So thou art hurt,” Pilar said. “Hast thou ever seen a Gitana who was not about to
have, or just to have had, a child?”
“Thou.”
“Leave it,” Pilar said. “There is no one who cannot be hurt. What I was saying is that
age brings its own form of ugliness to all. There is no need to detail it. But if the Inglés
must learn that odor that he covets to recognize he must go to the matadero early in the
morning.”
“I will go,” Robert Jordan said. “But I will get the odor as they pass without kissing one.
I fear the sprouts, too, as Rafael does.”
“Kiss one,” Pilar said. “Kiss one, Inglés, for thy knowledge’s sake and then, with this in
thy nostrils, walk back up into the city and when thou seest a refuse pail with dead
flowers in it plunge thy nose deep into it and inhale so that scent mixes with those thou
hast already in thy nasal passages.”
“Now have I done it,” Robert Jordan said. “What flowers were they?”
“Chrysanthemums.”
“Continue,” Robert Jordan said. “I smell them.”
“Then,” Pilar went on, “it is important that the day be in autumn with rain, or at least
some fog, or early winter even and now thou shouldst continue to walk through the city
and down the Calle de Salud smelling what thou wilt smell where they are sweeping out
the casas de putas and emptying the siop jars into the drains and, with this odor of
love’s labor lost mixed sweetly with soapy water and cigarette butts only faintly reaching
thy nostrils, thou shouldst go on to the JardIn Botánico where at night those girls who
can no longer work in the houses do their work against the iron gates of the park and
the iron picketed fences and upon the sidewalks. It is there in the shadow of the trees
against the iron railings that they will perform all that a man wishes; from the simplest
requests at a remuneration of ten centimos up to a peseta for that great act that we are
born to and there, on a dead flower bed that has not yet been plucked out and
replanted, and so serves to soften the earth that is so much softer than the sidewalk,
thou wilt find an abandoned gunny sack with the odor of the wet earth, the dead flowers,
and the doings of that night. In this sack will be contained the essence of it all, both the
dead earth and the dead stalks of the flowers and their rotted blooms and the smell that
is both the death and birth of man. Thou wilt wrap this sack around thy head and try to
breathe through it.”
“No.”
“Yes,” Pilar said. “Thou wilt wrap this sack around thy head and try to breathe and
then, if thou hast not lost any of the previous odors, when thou inhalest deeply, thou wilt
smell the odor of deathto-come as we know it.”
“All right,” Robert Jordan said. “And you say Kashkin smelt like that when he was
here?”
“Yes.”
“Well,” said Robert Jordan gravely. “If that is true it is a good thing that I shot him.”
“Olé,” the gypsy said. The others laughed.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway140
“Very good,” Primitivo approved. “That should hold her for a while.”
“But Pilar,” Fernando said. “Surely you could not expect one of Don Roberto’s
education to do such vile things.”
“No,” Pilar agreed.
“All of that is of the utmost repugnance.”
“Yes,” Pilar agreed.
“You would not expect him actually to perform those degrading acts?”
“No,” Pilar said. “Go to bed, will you?”
“But, Pilar—” Fernando went on.
“Shut up, will you?” Pilar said to him suddenly and viciously. “Do not make a fool of
thyself and I will try not to make a fool of myself talking with people who cannot
understand what one speaks of.”
“I confess I do not understand,” Fernando began.
“Don’t confess and don’t try to understand,” Pilar said. “Is it still snowing outside?”
Robert Jordan went to the mouth of the cave, lifted the blanket and looked out. It was
clear and cold in the night outside and no snow was falling. He looked through the tree
trunks where the whiteness lay and up through the trees to where the sky was now
clear. The air came into his lungs sharp and cold as he breathed.
El Sordo will leave plenty of tracks if he has stolen horses tonight, he thought.
He dropped the blanket and came back into the smoky cave. “It is clear,” he said. “The
storm is over.”
20
Now in the night he lay and waited for the girl to come to him. There was no wind now
and the pines were still in the night. The trunks of the pines projected from the snow that
covered all the ground, and he lay in the robe feeling the suppleness of the bed under
him that he had made, his legs stretched long against the warmth of the robe, the air
sharp and cold on his head and in his nostrils as he breathed. Under his head, as he lay
on his side, was the bulge of the trousers and the coat that he had wrapped around his
shoes to make a pillow and against his side was the cold metal of the big automatic
pistol he had taken from the holster when he undressed and fastened by its lanyard to
his right wrist. He pushed the pistol away and settled deeper into the robe as he
watched, across the snow, the dark break in the rocks that was the entrance to the
cave. The sky was clear and there was enough light reflected from the snow to see the
trunks of the trees and the bulk of the rocks where the cave was.
Earlier in the evening he had taken the ax and gone outside of the cave and walked
through the new snow to the edge of the clearing and cut down a small spruce tree. In
the dark he had dragged it, butt first, to the lee of the rock wall. There close to the rock,
he had held the tree upright, holding the trunk firm with one hand, and, holding the ax-
haft close to the head had lopped off all the boughs until he had a pile of them. Then,
leaving the pile of boughs, he had laid the bare pole of the trunk down in the snow and
gone into the cave to get a slab of wood he had seen against the wall. With this slab he
scraped the ground clear of the snow along the rock wall and then picked up his boughs
and shaking them clean of snow laid them in rows, like overlapping plumes, until he had
a bed. He put the pole across the foot of the bough bed to hold the branches in place
and pegged it firm with two pointed pieces of wood he split from the edge of the slab.
Then he carried the slab and the ax back into the cave, ducking under the blanket as
he came in, and leaned them both against the wall.
“What do you do outside?” Pilar had asked.
“I made a bed.”
“Don’t cut pieces from my new shelf for thy bed.”
“I am sorry.”
“It has no importance,” she said. “There are more slabs at the sawmill. What sort of
bed hast thou made?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway141
“As in my country.”
“Then sleep well on it,” she had said and Robert Jordan had opened one of the packs
and pulled the robe out and replaced those things wrapped in it back in the pack and
carried the robe out, ducking under the blanket again, and spread it over the boughs so
that the closed end of the robe was against the pole that was pegged cross-wise at the
foot of the bed. The open head of the robe was protected by the rock wall of the cliff.
Then he went back into the cave for his packs but Pilar said, “They can sleep with me as
last night.”
“Will you not have sentries?” he asked. “The night is clear and the storm is over.”
“Fernando goes,” Pilar said.
Maria was in the back of the cave and Robert Jordan could not see her.
“Good night to every one,” he had said. “I am going to sleep.”
Of the others, who were laying out blankets and bedrolls on the floor in front of the
cooking fire, pushing back the slab tables and the rawhide-covered stools to make
sleeping space, Primitivo and Andrés looked up and said, “Buenas noches.”
Anselmo was already asleep in a corner, rolled in his blanket and his cape, not even
his nose showing. Pablo was asleep in his chair.
“Do you want a sheep hide for thy bed?” Pilar asked Robert Jordan softly.
“Nay,” he said. “Thank thee. I do not need it.”
“Sleep well,” she said. “I will respond for thy material.”
Fernando had gone out with him and stood a moment where Robert Jordan had
spread the sleeping robe.
“You have a curious idea to sleep in the open, Don Roberto,” he said standing there in
the dark, muffled in his blanket cape, his carbine slung over his shoulder.
“I am accustomed to it. Good night.”
“Since you are accustomed to it.”
“When are you relieved?”
“At four.”
“There is much cold between now and then.”
“I am accustomed to it,” Fernando said.
“Since, then, you are accustomed to it—” Robert Jordan said politely.
“Yes,” Fernando agreed. “Now I must get up there. Good night, Don Roberto.”
“Good night, Fernando.”
Then he had made a pillow of the things he took off and gotten into the robe and then
lain and waited, feeling the spring of the boughs under the flannelly, feathered lightness
of the robe warmth, watching the mouth of the cave across the snow; feeling his heart
beat as he waited.
The night was clear and his head felt as clear and cold as the air. He smelled the odor
of the pine boughs under him, the piney smell of the crushed needles and the sharper
odor of the resinous sap from the cut limbs. Pilar, he thought. Pilar and the smell of
death. This is the smell I love. This and fresh-cut clover, the crushed sage as you ride
after cattle, wood-smoke and the burning leaves of autumn. That must be the odor of
nostalgia, the smell of the smoke from the piles of raked leaves burning in the streets in
the fall in Missoula. Which would you rather smell? Sweet grass the Indians used in their
baskets? Smoked leather? The odor of the ground in the spring after rain? The smell of
the sea as you walk through the gorse on a headland in Galicia? Or the wind from the
land as you come in toward Cuba in the dark? That was the odor of the cactus flowers,
mimosa and the sea-grape shrubs. Or would you rather smell frying bacon in the
morning when you are hungry? Or coffee in the morning? Or a Jonathan apple as you
bit into it? Or a cider mill in the grinding, or bread fresh from the oven? You must be
hungry, he thought, and he lay on his side and watched the entrance of the cave in the
light that the stars reflected from the snow.
Some one came out from under the blanket and he could see whoever it was standing
by the break in the rock that made the entrance. Then he heard a slithering sound in the
snow and then whoever it was ducked down and went back in.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway142
I suppose she won’t come until they are all asleep, he thought. It is a waste of time.
The night is half gone. Oh, Maria. Come now quickly, Maria, for there is little time. He
heard the soft sound of snow falling from a branch onto the snow on the ground. A little
wind was rising. He felt it on his face. Suddenly he felt a panic that she might not come.
The wind rising now reminded him how soon it would be morning. More snow fell from
the branches as he heard the wind now moving the pine tops.
Come now, Maria. Please come here now quickly, he thought. Oh, come here now.
Do not wait. There is no importance any more to your waiting until they are asleep.
Then he saw her coming out from under the blanket that covered the cave mouth. She
stood there a moment and he knew it was she but he could not see what she was doing.
He whistled a low whistle and she was still at the cave mouth doing something in the
darkness of the rock shadow. Then she came running, carrying something in her hands
and he saw her running long-legged through the snow. Then she was kneeling by the
robe, her head pushed hard against him, slapping snow from her feet. She kissed him
and handed him her bundle.
“Put it with thy pillow,” she said. “I took these off there to save time.”
“You came barefoot through the snow?”
“Yes,” she said, “and wearing only my wedding shirt.”
He held her close and tight in his arms and she rubbed her head against his chin.
“Avoid the feet,” she said. “They are very cold, Roberto.”
“Put them here and warm them.”
“Nay,” she said. “They will warm quickly. But say quickly now that you love me.”
“I love thee.”
“Good. Good. Good.”
“I love thee, little rabbit.”
“Do you love my wedding shirt?”
“It is the same one as always.”
“Yes. As last night. It is my wedding shirt.”
“Put thy feet here.”
“Nay, that would be abusive. They will warm of themselves. They are warm to me. It is
only that the snow has made them cold toward thee. Say it again.”
“I love thee, my little rabbit.”
“I love thee, too, and I am thy wife.”
“Were they asleep?”
“No,” she said. “But I could support it no longer. And what importance has it?”
“None,” he said, and felt her against him, slim and long and warmly lovely. “No other
thing has importance.”
“Put thy hand on my head,” she said, “and then let me see if I can kiss thee.
“Was it well?” she asked.
“Yes,” he said. “Take off thy wedding shirt.”
“You think I should?”
“Yes, if thou wilt not be cold.”
“Qué va, cold. I am on fire.”
“I, too. But afterwards thou wilt not be cold?”
“No. Afterwards we will be as one animal of the forest and be so close that neither one
can tell that one of us is one and not the other. Can you not feel my heart be your
heart?”
“Yes. There is no difference.”
“Now, feel. I am thee and thou art me and all of one is the other. And I love thee, oh, I
love thee so. Are you not truly one? Canst thou not feel it?”
“Yes,” he said. “It is true.”
“And feel now. Thou hast no heart but mine.”
“Nor any other legs, nor feet, nor of the body.”
“But we are different,” she said. “I would have us exactly the same.”
“You do not mean that.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway143
“Yes I do. I do. That is a thing I had to tell thee.”
“You do not mean that.”
“Perhaps I do not,” she said speaking softly with her lips against his shoulder. “But I
wished to say it. Since we are different I am glad that thou art Roberto and I Maria. But if
thou should ever wish to change I would be glad to change. I would be thee because I
love thee so.”
“I do not wish to change. It is better to be one and each one to be the one he is.”
“But we will be one now and there will never be a separate one.” Then she said, “I will
be thee when thou are not there. Oh, I love thee so and I must care well for thee.”
“Maria.”
“Yes.”
“Maria.”
“Yes.”
“Maria.”
“Oh, yes. Please.”
“Art thou not cold?”
“Oh, no. Pull the robe over thy shoulders.”
“Maria.”
“I cannot speak.”
“Oh, Maria. Maria. Maria.”
Then afterwards, close, with the night cold outside, in the long warmth of the robe, her
head touching his cheek, she lay quiet and happy against him and then said softly, “And
thou?”
“Como tu,” he said.
“Yes,” she said. “But it was not as this afternoon.”
“No.”
“But I loved it more. One does not need to die.”
“Ojala no,” he said. “I hope not.”
“I did not mean that.”
“I know. I know what thou meanest. We mean the same.”
“Then why did you say that instead of what I meant?”
“With a man there is a difference.”
“Then I am glad that we are different.”
“And so am I,” he said. “But I understood about the dying. I only spoke thus, as a man,
from habit. I feel the same as thee.”
“However thou art and however thou speakest is how I would have thee be.”
“And I love thee and I love thy name, Maria.”
“It is a common name.”
“No,” he said. “It is not common.”
“Now should we sleep?” she said. “I could sleep easily.”
“Let us sleep,” he said, and he felt the long light body, warm against him, comforting
against him, abolishing loneliness against him, magically, by a simple touching of flanks,
of shoulders and of feet, making an alliance against death with him, and he said, “Sleep
well, little long rabbit.”
She said, “I am asleep already.”
“I am going to sleep,” he said. “Sleep well, beloved.” Then he was asleep and happy
as he slept.
But in the night he woke and held her tight as though she were all of life and it was
being taken from him. He held her feeling she was all of life there was and it was true.
But she was sleeping well and soundly and she did not wake. So he rolled away onto
his side and pulled the robe over her head and kissed her once on her neck under the
robe and then pulled the pistol lanyard up and put the pistol by his side where he could
reach it handily and then he lay there in the night thinking.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway144
21
A warm wind came with daylight and he could hear the snow melting in the trees and
the heavy sound of its falling. It was a late spring morning. He knew with the first breath
he drew that the snow had been only a freak storm in the mountains and it would be
gone by noon. Then he heard a horse coming, the hoofs balled with the wet snow
thumping dully as the horseman trotted. He heard the noise of a carbine scabbard
slapping loosely and the creak of leather.
“Maria,” he said, and shook the girl’s shoulder to waken her. “Keep thyself under the
robe,” and he buttoned his shirt with one hand and held the automatic pistol in the othet
loosening the safety catch with his thumb. He saw the girl’s cropped head disappear
with a jerk under the robe and then he saw the horseman coming through the trees. He
crouched now in the robe and holding the pistol in both hands aimed it at the man as he
rode toward him. He had never seen this man before.
The horseman was almost opposite him now. He was riding a big gray gelding and he
wore a khaki beret, a blanket cape like a poncho, and heavy black boots. From the
scabbard on the right of his saddle projected the stock and the long oblong clip of a
short automatic rifle. He had a young, hard face and at this moment he saw Robert
Jordan.
He reached his hand down toward the scabbard and as he swung low, turning and
jerking at the scabbard, Robert Jordan saw the scarlet of the formalized device he wore
on the left breast of his khaki blanket cape.
Aiming at the center of his chest, a little lower than the device, Robert Jordan fired.
The pistol roared in the snowy woods.
The horse plunged as though he had been spurred and the young man, still tugging at
the scabbard, slid over toward the ground, his right foot caught in the stirrup. The horse
broke off through the trees dragging him, bumping, face downward, and Robert Jordan
stood up holding the pistol now in one hand.
The big gray horse was galloping through the pines. There was a broad swath in the
snow where the man dragged with a scarlet streak along one side of it. People were
coming out of the mouth of the cave. Robert Jordan reached down and unrolled his
trousers from the pillow and began to put them on.
“Get thee dressed,” he said to Maria.
Overhead he heard the noise of a plane flying very high. Through the trees he saw
where the gray horse had stopped and was standing, his rider still hanging face down
from the stirrup.
“Go catch that horse,” he called to Primitivo who had started over toward him. Then,
“Who was on guard at the top?”
“Rafael,” Pilar said from the cave. She stood there, her hair still down her back in two
braids.
“There’s cavalry out,” Robert Jordan said. “Get your damned gun up there.”
He heard Pilar call, “Agustín,” into the cave. Then she went into the cave and then two
men came running out, one with the automatic rifle with its tripod swung on his shoulder;
the other with a sackful of the pans.
“Get up there with them,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo. “You lie beside the gun and
hold the legs still,” he said.
The three of them went up the trail through the woods at a run.
The sun had not yet come up over the tops of the mountains and Robert Jordan stood
straight buttoning his trousers and tightening his belt, the big pistol hanging from the
lanyard on his wrist. He put the pistol in its holster on his belt and slipped the knot down
on the lanyard and passed the ioop over his head.
Somebody will choke you with that sometime, he thought. Well, this has done it. He
took the pistol out of the holster, removed the clip, inserted one of the cartridges from
the row alongside of the holster and shoved the clip back into the butt of the pistol.
He looked through the trees to where Primitivo, holding the reins of the horse, was“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway145
twisting the rider’s foot out of the stirrup. The body lay face down in the snow and as he
watched Primitivo was going through the pockets.
“Come on,” he called. “Bring the horse.”
As he knelt to put on his rope-soled shoes, Robert Jordan could feel Maria against his
knees, dressing herself under the robe. She had no place in his life now.
That cavalryman did not expect anything, he was thinking. He was not following horse
tracks and he was not even properly alert, let alone alarmed. He was not even following
the tracks up to the post. He must have been one of a patrol scattered out in these hills.
But when the patrol misses him they will follow his tracks here. Unless the snow melts
first, he thought. Unless something happens to the patrol.
“You better get down below,” he said to Pablo.
They were all out of the cave now, standing there with the carbines and with grenades
on their belts. Pilar held a leather bag of grenades toward Robert Jordan and he took
three and put them in his pocket. He ducked into the cave, found his two packs, opened
the one with the submachine gun in it and took out the barrel and stock, slipped the
stock onto the forward assembly and put one clip into the gun and three in his pockets.
He locked the pack and started for the door. I’ve got two pockets full of hardware, he
thought. I hope the seams hold. He came out of the cave and said to Pablo, “I’m going
up above. Can Agustín shoot that gun?”
“Yes,” Pablo said. He was watching Primitivo leading up the horse.
“Mira qué caballo,” he said. “Look, what a horse.”
The big gray was sweating and shivering a little and Robert Jordan patted him on the
withers.
“I will put him with the others,” Pablo said.
“No,” Robert Jordan said. “He has made tracks into here. He must make them out.”
“True,” agreed Pablo. “I will ride him out and will hide him and bring him in when the
snow is melted. Thou hast much head today, Inglés.”
“Send some one below,” Robert Jordan said. “We’ve got to get up there.”
“It is not necessary,” Pablo said. “Horsemen cannot come that way. But we can get
out, by there and by two other places. It is better not to make tracks if there are planes
coming. Give me the bota with wine, Pilar.”
“To go off and get drunk,” Pilar said. “Here, take these instead.” He reached over and
put two of the grenades in his pockets.
“Qué va, to get drunk,” Pablo said. “There is gravity in the situation. But give me the
bota. I do not like to do all this on water.”
He reached his arms up, took the reins and swung up into the saddle. He grinned and
patted the nervous horse. Robert Jordan saw him rub his leg along the horse’s flank
affectionately.
“Qué caballo más bonito,” he said and patted the big gray again. “Qué caballo más
hermoso. Come on. The faster this gets out of here the better.”
He reached down and pulled the light automatic rifle with its ventilated barrel, really a
submachine gun built to take the 9 mm. pistol cartridge, from the scabbard, and looked
at it. “Look how they are armed,” he said. “Look at modern cavalry.”
“There’s modern cavalry over there on his face,” Robert Jordan said. “Vamonos.”
“Do you, Andrés, saddle and hold the horses in readiness. If you hear firing bring them
up to the woods behind the gap. Come with thy arms and leave the women to hold the
horses. Fernando, see that my sacks are brought also. Above all, that my sacks are
brought carefully. Thou to look after my sacks, too,” he said to Pilar. “Thou to verify that
they come with the horses. Vamonos,” he said. “Let us go.”
“The Maria and I will prepare all for leaving,” Pilar said. Then to Robert Jordan, “Look
at him,” nodding at Pablo on the gray horse, sitting him in the heavy-thighed herdsman
manner, the horse’s nostrils widening as Pablo replaced the clip in the automatic rifle.
“See what a horse has done for him.”
“That I should have two horses,” Robert Jordan said fervently.
“Danger is thy horse.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway146
“Then give me a mule,” Robert Jordan grinned.
“Strip me that,” he said to Pilar and jerked his head toward where the man lay face
down in the snow. “And bring everything, all the letters and papers, and put them in the
outside pocket of my sack. Everything, understand?”
“Yes.”
“Vamonos,” he said.
Pablo rode ahead and the two men followed in a single file in order not to track up the
snow. Robert Jordan carried the submachine gun muzzle down, carrying it by its forward
hand grip. I wish it took the same ammunition that saddle gun takes, he thought. But it
doesn’t. This is a German gun. This was old Kashkin’s gun.
The sun was coming over the mountains now. A warm wind was blowing and the
snow was melting. It was a lovely late spring morning.
Robert Jordan looked back and saw Maria now standing with Pilar. Then she came
running up the trail. He dropped behind Primitivo to speak to her.
“Thou,” she said. “Can I go with thee?”
“No. Help Pilar.”
She was walking behind him and put her hand on his arm.
“I’m coming.”
“Nay.”
She kept on walking close behind him.
“I could hold the legs of the gun in the way thou told Anselmo.”
“Thou wilt hold no legs. Neither of guns nor of nothing.”
Walking beside him she reached forward and put her hand in his pocket.
“No,” he said. “But take good care of thy wedding shirt.”
“Kiss me,” she said, “if thou goest.”
“Thou art shameless,” he said.
“Yes,” she said. “Totally.”
“Get thee back now. There is much work to do. We may fight here if they follow these
horse tracks.”
“Thou,” she said. “Didst thee see what he wore on his chest?”
“Yes. Why not?”
“It was the Sacred Heart.”
“Yes. All the people of Navarre wear it.”
“And thou shot for that?”
“No. Below it. Get thee back now.”
“Thou,” she said. “I saw all.”
“Thou saw nothing. One man. One man from a horse. Vete. Get thee back.”
“Say that you love me.”
“No. Not now.”
“Not love me now?”
“Déjamos. Get thee back. One does not do that and love all at the same moment.”
“I want to go to hold the legs of the gun and while it speaks love thee all in the same
moment.”
“Thou art crazy. Get thee back now.”
“I am crazy,” she said. “I love thee.”
“Then get thee back.”
“Good. I go. And if thou dost not love me, I love thee enough for both.”
He looked at her and smiled through his thinking.
“When you hear firing,” he said, “come with the horses. Aid the Pilar with my sacks. It
is possible there will be nothing. I hope so.”
“I go,” she said. “Look what a horse Pablo rides.”
The big gray was moving ahead up the trail.
“Yes. But go.”
“I go.”
Her fist, clenched tight in his pocket, beat hard against his thigh. He looked at her and“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway147
saw there were tears in her eyes. She pulled her fist out of his pocket and put both arms
tight around his neck and kissed him.
“I go,” she said. “Me voy. I go.”
He looked back and saw her standing there, the first morning sunlight on her brown
face and the cropped, tawny, burned-gold hair. She lifted her fist at him and turned and
walked back down the trail, her head down.
Primitivo turned around and looked after her.
“If she did not have her hair cut so short she would be a pretty girl,” he said.
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said. He was thinking of something else.
“How is she in the bed?” Primitivo asked.
“What?”
“In the bed.”
“Watch thy mouth.”
“One should not be offended when—”
“Leave it,” Robert Jordan said. He was looking at the position.
22
“Cut me pine branches,” Robert Jordan said to Primitivo, “and bring them quickly.”
“I do not like the gun there,” he said to Agustín.
“Why?”
“Place it over there,” Robert Jordan pointed, “and later I will tell thee.”
“Here, thus. Let me help thee. Here,” he said, then squatted down.
He looked out across the narrow oblong, noting the height of the rocks on either side.
“It must be farther,” he said, “farther out. Good. Here. That will do until it can be done
properly. There. Put the stones there. Here is one. Put another there at the side. Leave
room for the muzzle to swing. The stone must be farther to this side. Anselmo. Get thee
down to the cave and bring me an ax. Quickly.”
“Have you never had a proper emplacement for the gun?” he said to Agustín.
“We always placed it here.”
“Kashkin never said to put it there?”
“No. The gun was brought after he left.”
“Did no one bring it who knew how to use it?”
“No. It was brought by porters.”
“What a way to do things,” Robert Jordan said. “It was just given to you without
instruction?”
“Yes, as a gift might be given. One for us and one for El Sordo. Four men brought
them. Anselmo guided them.”
“It was a wonder they did not lose them with four men to cross the lines.”
“I thought so, too,” Agustín said. “I thought those who sent them meant for them to be
lost. But Anselmo brought them well.”
“You know how to handle it?”
“Yes. I have experimented. I know. Pablo knows. Primitivo knows. So does Fernando.
We have made a study of taking it apart and putting it together on the table in the cave.
Once we had it apart and could not get it together for two days. Since then we have not
had it apart.”
“Does it shoot now?”
“Yes. But we do not let the gypsy nor others frig with it.”
“You see? From there it was useless,” he said. “Look. Those rocks which should
protect your flanks give cover to those who will attack you. With such a gun you must
seek a flatness over which to fire. Also you must take them sideways. See? Look now.
All that is dominated.”
“I see,” said Agustín. “But we have never fought in defense except when our town was
taken. At the train there were soldiers with the máquina.”
“Then we will all learn together,” Robert Jordan said. “There are a few things to“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway148
observe. Where is the gypsy who should be here?”
“I do not know.”
“Where is it possible for him to be?”
“I do not know.”
Pablo had ridden out through the pass and turned once and ridden in a circle across
the level space at the top that was the field of fire for the automatic rifle. Now Robert
Jordan watched him riding down the slope alongside the tracks the horse had left when
he was ridden in. He disappeared in the trees turning to the left.
I hope he doesn’t run right into cavalry, Robert Jordan thought. I’m afraid we’d have
him right here in our laps.
Primitivo brought the pine branches and Robert Jordan stuck them through the snow
into the unfrozen earth, arching them over the gun from either side.
“Bring more,” he said. “There must be cover for the two men who serve it. This is not
good but it will serve until the ax comes. Listen,” he said, “if you hear a plane lie flat
wherever thou art in the shadows of the rocks. I am here with the gun.”
Now with the sun up and the warm wind blowing it was pleasant on the side of the
rocks where the sun shone. Four horses, Robert Jordan thought. The two women and
me, Anselmo, Primitivo, Fernando, Agustín, what the hell is the name of the other
brother? That’s eight. Not counting the gypsy. Makes nine. Plus Pablo gone with one
horse makes ten. Andrés is his name. The other brother. Plus the other, Eladio. Makes
ten. That’s not one-half a horse apiece. Three men can hold this and four can get away.
Five with Pablo. That’s two left over. Three with Eladio. Where the hell is he?
God knows what will happen to Sordo today if they picked up the trail of those horses
in the snow. That was tough; the snow stopping that way. But it melting today will even
things up. But not for Sordo. I’m afraid it’s too late to even it up for Sordo.
If we can last through today and not have to fight we can swing the whole show
tomorrow with what we have. I know we can. Not well, maybe. Not as it should be, to be
foolproof, not as we would have done; but using everybody we can swing it. If we don’t
have to fight today. God help us if we have to fight today.
I don’t know any place better to lay up in the meantime than this. If we move now we
only leave tracks. This is as good a place as any and if the worst gets to be the worst
there are three ways out of this place. There is the dark then to come and from
wherever we are in these hills, I can reach and do the bridge at daylight. I don’t know
why I worried about it before. It seems easy enough now. I hope they get the planes up
on time for once. I certainly hope that. Tomorrow is going to be a day with dust on the
road.
Well, today will be very interesting or very dull. Thank God we’ve got that cavalry
mount out and away from here. I don’t think even if they ride right up here they will go in
the way those tracks are now. They’ll think he stopped and circled and they’ll pick up
Pablo’s tracks. I wonder where the old swine will go. He’ll probably leave tracks like an
old bull elk spooking out of the country and work way up and then when the snow melts
circle back below. That horse certainly did things for him. Of course he may have just
mucked off with him too. Well, he should be able to take care of himself. He’s been
doing this a long time. I wouldn’t trust him farther than you can throw Mount Everest,
though.
I suppose it’s smarter to use these rocks and build a good blind for this gun than to
make a proper emplacement for it. You’d be digging and get caught with your pants
down if they come or if the planes come. She will hold this, the way she is, as long as it
is any use to hold it, and anyway I can’t stay to fight. I have to get out of here with that
stuff and I’m going to take Anselmo with me. Who would stay to cover us while we got
away if we have to fight here?
Just then, while he was watching all of the country that was visible, he saw the gypsy
coming through the rocks to the left. He was walking with a loose, high-hipped, sloppy
swing, his carbine was slung on his back, his brown face was grinning and he carried
two big hares, one in each hand. He carried them by the legs, heads swinging.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway149
“Hola, Roberto,” he called cheerfully.
Robert Jordan put his hand to his mouth, and the gypsy looked startled. He slid over
behind the rocks to where Robert Jordan was crouched beside the brush-shielded
automatic rifle. He crouched down and laid the hares in the snow. Robert Jordan looked
up at him.
“You hijo de la gran puta!” he said softly. “Where the obscenity have you been?”
“I tracked them,” the gypsy said. “I got them both. They had made love in the snow.”
“And thy post?”
“It was not for long,” the gypsy whispered. “What passes? Is there an alarm?”
“There is cavalry out.”
“Rediós!” the gypsy said. “Hast thou seen them?”
“There is one at the camp now,” Robert Jordan said. “He came for breakfast.”
“I thought I heard a shot or something like one,” the gypsy said. “I obscenity in the
milk! Did he come through here?”
“Here. Thy post.”
“Ay, mi madre!” the gypsy said. “I am a poor, unlucky man.”
“If thou wert not a gypsy, I would shoot thee.”
“No, Roberto. Don’t say that. I am sorry. It was the hares. Before daylight I heard the
male thumping in the snow. You cannot imagine what a debauch they were engaged in.
I went toward the noise but they were gone. I followed the tracks in the snow and high
up I found them together and slew them both. Feel the fatness of the two for this time of
year. Think what the Pilar will do with those two. I am sorry, Roberto, as sorry as thee.
Was the cavalryman killed?”
“Yes.”
“By thee?”
“Yes.”
“Qué tio!” the gypsy said in open flattery. “Thou art a veritable phenomenon.”
“Thy mother!” Robert Jordan said. He could not help grinning at the gypsy. “Take thy
hares to camp and bring us up some breakfast.”
He put a hand out and felt of the hares that lay limp, long, heavy, thick-furred, big-
footed and long-eared in the snow, their round dark eyes open.
“They are fat,” he said.
“Fat!” the gypsy said. “There’s a tub of lard on the ribs of each one. In my life have I
never dreamed of such hares.”
“Go then,” Robert Jordan said, “and come quickly with the breakfast and bring to me
the documentation of that requeté. Ask Pilar for it.”
“You are not angry with me, Roberto?”
“Not angry. Disgusted that you should leave your post. Suppose it had been a troop of
cavalry?”
“Rediós,” the gypsy said. “How reasonable you are.”
“Listen to me. You cannot leave a post again like that. Never. I do not speak of
shooting lightly.”
“Of course not. And another thing. Never would such an opportunity as the two hares
present itself again. Not in the life of one man.”
“Anda!” Robert Jordan said. “And hurry back.”
The gypsy picked up the two hares and slipped back through the rocks and Robert
Jordan looked out across the flat opening and the slopes of the hill below. Two crows
circled overhead and then lit in a pine tree below. Another crow joined them and Robert
Jordan, watching them, thought: those are my sentinels. As long as those are quiet
there is no one coming through the trees.
The gypsy, he thought. He is truly worthless. He has no political development, nor any
discipline, and you could not rely on him for anything. But I need him for tomorrow. I
have a use for him tomorrow. It’s odd to see a gypsy in a war. They should be exempted
like conscientious objectors. Or as the physically and mentally unfit. They are worthless.
But conscientious objectors weren’t exempted in this war. No one was exempted. It“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway150
came to one and all alike. Well, it had come here now to this lazy outfit. They had it now.
Agustín and Primitivo came up with the brush and Robert Jordan built a good blind for
the automatic rifle, a blind that would conceal the gun from the air and that would look
natural from the forest. He showed them where to place a man high in the rocks to the
right where he could see all the country below and to the right, and another where he
could command the only stretch where the left wall might be climbed.
“Do not fire if you see any one from there,” Robert Jordan said. “Roll a rock down as a
warning, a small rock, and signal to us with thy rifle, thus,” he lifted the rifle and held it
over his head as though guarding it. “Thus for numbers,” he lifted the rifle up and down.
“If they are dismounted point thy rifle muzzle at the ground. Thus. Do not fire from there
until thou hearest the máquina fire. Shoot at a man’s knees when you shoot from that
height. If you hear me whistle twice on this whistle get down, keeping behind cover, and
come to these rocks where the máquina is.”
Primitivo raised the rifle.
“I understand,” he said. “It is very simple.”
“Send first the small rock as a warning and indicate the direction and the number. See
that you are not seen.”
“Yes,” Primitivo said. “If I can throw a grenade?”
“Not until the máquina has spoken. It may be that cavalry will come searching for their
comrade and still not try to enter. They may follow the tracks of Pablo. We do not want
combat if it can be avoided. Above all that we should avoid it. Now get up there.”
“Me voy,” Primitivo said, and climbed up into the high rocks with his carbine.
“Thou, Agustín,” Robert Jordan said. “What do you know of the gun?”
Agustín squatted there, tall, black, stubbly joweled, with his sunken eyes and thin
mouth and his big work-worn hands.
“Pues, to load it. To aim it. To shoot it. Nothing more.”
“You must not fire until they are within fifty meters and only when you are sure they
will be coming into the pass which leads to the cave,” Robert Jordan said.
“Yes. How far is that?”
“That rock.”
“If there is an officer shoot him first. Then move the gun onto the others. Move very
slowly. It takes little movement. I will teach Fernando to tap it. Hold it tight so that it does
not jump and sight carefully and do not fire more than six shots at a time if you can help
it. For the fire of the gun jumps upward. But each time fire at one man and then move
from him to another. At a man on a horse, shoot at his belly.”
“Yes.”
“One man should hold the tripod still so that the gun does not jump. Thus. He will load
the gun for thee.”
“And where will you be?”
“I will be here on the left. Above, where I can see all and I will cover thy left with this
small máquina. Here. If they should come it would be possible to make a massacre. But
you must not fire until they are that close.”
“I believe that we could make a massacre. Menuda matanza!”
“But I hope they do not come.”
“If it were not for thy bridge we could make a massacre here and get out.”
“It would avail nothing. That would serve no purpose. The bridge is a part of a plan to
win the war. This would be nothing. This would be an incident. A nothing.”
“Qué va, nothing. Every fascist dead is a fascist less.”
“Yes. But with this of the bridge we can take Segovia. The Capital of a Province. Think
of that. It will be the first one we will take.”
“Thou believest in this seriously? That we can take Segovia?”
“Yes. It is possible with the bridge blown correctly.”
“I would like to have the massacre here and the bridge, too.”
“Thou hast much appetite,” Robert Jordan told him.
All this time he had been watching the crows. Now he saw one was watching“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway151
something. The bird cawed and flew up. But the other crow still stayed in the tree.
Robert Jordan looked up toward Primitivo’s place high in the rocks. He saw him
watching out over the country below but he made no signal. Robert Jordan leaned
forward and worked the lock on the automatic rifle, saw the round in the chamber and let
the lock down. The crow was still there in the tree. The other circled wide over the snow
and then settled again. In the sun and the warm wind the snow was falling from the
laden branches of the pines.
“I have a massacre for thee for tomorrow morning,” Robert Jordan said. “It is
necessary to exterminate the post at the sawmill.”
“I am ready,” Agustín said, “Estoy listo.”
“Also the post at the roadmender’s hut below the bridge.”
“For the one or for the other,” Agustín said. “Or for both.”
“Not for both. They will be done at the same time,” Robert Jordan said.
“Then for either one,” Agustín said. “Now for a long time have I wished for action in
this war. Pablo has rotted us here with inaction.”
Anselmo came up with the ax.
“Do you wish more branches?” he asked. “To me it seems well hidden.”
“Not branches,” Robert Jordan said. “Two small trees that we can plant here and there
to make it look more natural. There are not enough trees here for it to be truly natural.”
“I will bring them.”
“Cut them well back, so the stumps cannot be seen.”
Robert Jordan heard the ax sounding in the woods behind him. He looked up at
Primitivo above in the rocks and he looked down at the pines across the clearing. The
one crow was still there. Then he heard the first high, throbbing murmur of a plane
coming. He looked up and saw it high and tiny and silver in the sun, seeming hardly to
move in the high sky.
“They cannot see us,” he said to Agustín. “But it is well to keep down. That is the
second observation plane today.”
“And those of yesterday?” Agustín asked.
“They are like a bad dream now,” Robert Jordan said.
“They must be at Segovia. The bad dream waits there to become a reality.”
The plane was out of sight now over the mountains but the sound of its motors still
persisted.
As Robert Jordan looked, he saw the crow fly up. He flew straight away through the
trees without cawing.
23
“Get thee down,” Robert Jordan whispered to Agustín, and he turned his head and
flicked his hand Down, Down, to Anselmo who was coming through the gap with a pine
tree, carrying it over his shoulder like a Christmas tree. He saw the old man drop his
pine tree behind a rock and then he was out of sight in the rocks and Robert Jordan was
looking ahead across the open space toward the timber. He saw nothing and heard
nothing but he could feel his heart pounding and then he heard the clack of stone on
stone and the leaping, dropping clicks of a small rock falling. He turned his head to the
right and looking up saw Primitivo’s rifle raised and lowered four times horizontally. Then
there was nothing more to see but the white stretch in front of him with the circle of
horse tracks and the timber beyond.
“Cavalry,” he said softly to Agustín.
Agustín looked at him and his dark, sunken cheeks widened at their base as he
grinned. Robert Jordan noticed he was sweating. He reached over and put his hand on
his shoulder. His hand was still there as they saw the four horsemen ride out of the
timber and he felt the muscles in Agustín’s back twitch under his hand.
One horseman was ahead and three rode behind. The one ahead was following the
horse tracks. He looked down as he rode. The other three came behind him, fanned out“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway152
through the timber. They were all watching carefully. Robert Jordan felt his heart beating
against the snowy ground as he lay, his elbows spread wide and watched them over the
sights of the automatic rifle.
The man who was leading rode along the trail to where Pablo had circled and
stopped. The others rode up to him and they all stopped.
Robert Jordan saw them clearly over the blued steel barrel of the automatic rifle. He
saw the faces of the men, the sabers hanging, the sweat-darkened flanks of the horses,
and the cone-like slope of the khaki capes, and the Navarrese slant of the khaki berets.
The leader turned his horse directly toward the opening in the rocks where the gun was
placed and Robert Jordan saw his young, sunand wind-darkened face, his close-set
eyes, hawk nose and the overlong wedge-shaped chin.
Sitting his horse there, the horse’s chest toward Robert Jordan, the horse’s head high,
the butt of the light automatic rifle projecting forward from the scabbard at the right of the
saddle, the leader pointed toward the opening where the gun was.
Robert Jordan sunk his elbows into the ground and looked along the barrel at the four
riders stopped there in the snow. Three of them had their automatic rifles out. Two
carried them across the pommels of their saddles. The other sat his horse with the rifle
swung out to the right, the butt resting against his hip.
You hardly ever see them at such range, he thought. Not along the barrel of one of
these do you see them like this. Usually the rear sight is raised and they seem
miniatures of men and you have hell to make it carry up there; or they come running,
flopping, running, and you beat a slope with fire or bar a certain street, or keep it on the
windows; or far away you see them marching on a road. Only at the trains do you see
them like this. Only then are they like now, and with four of these you can make them
scatter. Over the gun sights, at this range, it makes them twice the size of men.
Thou, he thought, looking at the wedge of the front sight placed now firm in the slot of
the rear sight, the top of the wedge against the center of the leader’s chest, a little to the
right of the scarlet device that showed bright in the morning sun against the khaki cape.
Though, he thought, thinking in Spanish now and pressing his fingers forward against
the trigger guard to keep it away from where it would bring the quick, shocking, hurtling
rush from the automatic rifle. Thou, he thought again, thou art dead now in thy youth.
And thou, he thought, and thou, and thou. But let it not happen. Do not let it happen.
He felt Agustín beside him start to cough, felt him hold it, choke and swallow. Then as
he looked along the oiled blue of the barrel out through the opening between the
branches, his finger still pressed forward against the trigger guard, he saw the leader
turn his horse and point into the timber where Pablo’s trail led. The four of them trotted
into the timber and Agustín said softly, “Cabrones!”
Robert Jordan looked behind him at the rocks where Anselmo had dropped the tree.
The gypsy, Rafael, was coming toward them through the rocks, carrying a pair of cloth
saddlebags, his rifle slung on his back. Robert Jordan waved him down and the gypsy
ducked out of sight.
“We could have killed all four,” Agustín said quietly. He was still wet with sweat.
“Yes,” Robert Jordan whispered. “But with the firing who knows what might have
come?”
Just then he heard the noise of another rock falling and he looked around quickly. But
both the gypsy and Anselmo were out of sight. He looked at his wrist watch and then up
to where Primitivo was raising and lowering his rifle in what seemed an infinity of short
jerks. Pablo has forty-five minutes’ start, Robert Jordan thought, and then he heard the
noise of a body of cavalry coming.
“No te apures,” he whispered to Agustín. “Do not worry. They will pass as the others.”
They came into sight trotting along the edge of the timber in column of twos, twenty
mounted men, armed and uniformed as the others had been, their sabers swinging,
their carbines in their holsters; and then they went down into the timber as the others
had.
“Tu ves?” Robert Jordan said to Agustín. “Thou seest?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway153
“There were many,” Agustín said.
“These would we have had to deal with if we had destroyed the others,” Robert Jordan
said very softly. His heart had quieted now and his shirt felt wet on his chest from the
melting snow. There was a hollow feeling in his chest.
The sun was bright on the snow and it was melting fast. He could see it hollowing
away from the tree trunks and just ahead of the gun, before his eyes, the snow surface
was damp and lacily fragile as the heat of the sun melted the top and the warmth of the
earth breathed warmly up at the snow that lay upon it.
Robert Jordan looked up at Primitivo’s post and saw him signal, “Nothing,” crossing
his two hands, palms down.
Anselmo’s head showed above a rock and Robert Jordan motioned him up. The old
man slipped from rock to rock until he crept up and lay down flat beside the gun.
“Many,” he said. “Many!”
“I do not need the trees,” Robert Jordan said to him. “There is no need for further
forestal improvement.”
Both Anselmo and Agustín grinned.
“This has stood scrutiny well and it would be dangerous to plant trees now because
those people will return and perhaps they are not stupid.”
He felt the need to talk that, with him, was the sign that there had just been much
danger. He could always tell how bad it had been by the strength of the desire to talk
that came after.
“It was a good blind, eh?” he said.
“Good,” said Agustín. “To obscenity with all fascism good. We could have killed the
four of them. Didst thou see?” he said to Anselmo.
“I saw.”
“Thou,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo. “Thou must go to the post of yesterday or
another good post of thy selection to watch the road and report on all movement as of
yesterday. Already we are late in that. Stay until dark. Then come in and we will send
another.”
“But the tracks that I will make?”
“Go from below as soon as the snow is gone. The road will be muddied by the snow.
Note if there has been much traffic of trucks or if there are tank tracks in the softness on
the road. That is all we can tell until you are there to observe.”
“With your permission?” the old man asked.
“Surely.”
“With your permission, would it not be better for me to go into La Granja and inquire
there what passed last night and arrange for one to observe today thus in the manner
you have taught me? Such a one could report tonight or, better, I could go again to La
Granja for the report.”
“Have you no fear of encountering cavalry?”
“Not when the snow is gone.”
“Is there some one in La Granja capable of this?”
“Yes. Of this, yes. It would be a woman. There are various women of trust in La
Granja.”
“I believe it,” Agustín said. “More, I know it, and several who serve for other purposes.
You do not wish me to go?”
“Let the old man go. You understand this gun and the day is not over.”
“I will go when the snow melts,” Anselmo said. “And the snow is melting fast.”
“What think you of their chance of catching Pablo?” Robert Jordan asked Agustín.
“Pablo is smart,” Agustín said. “Do men catch a wise stag without hounds?”
“Sometimes,” Robert Jordan said.
“Not Pablo,” Agustín said. “Clearly, he is only a garbage of what he once was. But it is
not for nothing that he is alive and comfortable in these hills and able to drink himself to
death while there are so many others that have died against a wall.”
“Is he as smart as they say?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway154
“He is much smarter.”
“He has not seemed of great ability here.”
“Cómo qüe no? If he were not of great ability he would have died last night. It seems
to me you do not understand politics, Inglés, nor guerilla warfare. In politics and this
other the first thing is to continue to exist. Look how he continued to exist last night. And
the quantity of dung he ate both from me and from thee.”
Now that Pablo was back in the movements of the unit, Robert Jordan did not wish to
talk against him and as soon as he had uttered it he regretted saying the thing about his
ability. He knew himself how smart Pablo was. It was Pablo who had seen instantly all
that was wrong with the orders for the destruction of the bridge. He had made the
remark only from dislike and he knew as he made it that it was wrong. It was part of the
talking too much after a strain. So now he dropped the matter and said to Anselmo,
“And to go into La Granja in daylight?”
“It is not bad,” the old man said. “I will not go with a military band.”
“Nor with a bell around his neck,” Agustín said. “Nor carrying a banner.”
“How will you go?”
“Above and down through the forest.”
“But if they pick you up.”
“I have papers.”
“So have we all but thou must eat the wrong ones quickly.”
Anselmo shook his head and tapped the breast pocket of his smock.
“How many times have I contemplated that,” he said. “And never did I like to swallow
paper.”
“I have thought we should carry a little mustard on them all,” Robert Jordan said. “In
my left breast pocket I carry our papers. In my right the fascist papers. Thus one does
not make a mistake in an emergency.”
It must have been bad enough when the leader of the first patrol of cavalry had
pointed toward the entry because they were all talking very much. Too much, Robert
Jordan thought.
“But look, Roberto,” Agustín said. “They say the government moves further to the right
each day. That in the Republic they no longer say Comrade but Señor and Señora.
Canst shift thy pockets?”
“When it moves far enough to the right I will carry them in my hip pocket,” Robert
Jordan said, “and sew it in the center.”
“That they should stay in thy shirt,” Agustín said. “Are we to win this war and lose the
revolution?”
“Nay,” Robert Jordan said. “But if we do not win this war there will be no revolution nor
any Republic nor any thou nor any me nor anything but the most grand carajo.”
“So say I,” Anselmo said. “That we should win the war.”
“And afterwards shoot the anarchists and the Communists and all this canalla except
the good Republicans,” Agustín said.
“That we should win this war and shoot nobody,” Anselmo said. “That we should
govern justly and that all should participate in the benefits according as they have
striven for them. And that those who have fought against us should be educated to see
their error.”
“We will have to shoot many,” Agustín said. “Many, many, many.”
He thumped his closed right fist against the palm of his left hand.
“That we should shoot none. Not even the leaders. That they should be reformed by
work.”
“I know the work I’d put them at,” Agustín said, and he picked up some snow and put it
in his mouth.
“What, bad one?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Two trades of the utmost brilliance.”
“They are?”
Agustín put some more snow in his mouth and looked across the clearing where the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway155
cavalry had ridden. Then he spat the melted snow out. “Vaya. What a breakfast,” he
said. “Where is the filthy gypsy?”
“What trades?” Robert Jordan asked him. “Speak, bad mouth.”
“Jumping from planes without parachutes,” Agustín said, and his eyes shone. “That for
those that we care for. And being nailed to the tops of fence posts to be pushed over
backwards for the others.”
“That way of speaking is ignoble,” Anselmo said. “Thus we will never have a
Republic.”
“I would like to swim ten leagues in a strong soup made from the cojones of all of
them,” Agustín said. “And when I saw those four there and thought that we might kill
them I was like a mare in the corral waiting for the stallion.”
“You know why we did not kill them, though?” Robert Jordan said quietly.
“Yes,” Agustín said. “Yes. But the necessity was on me as it is on a mare in heat. You
cannot know what it is if you have not felt it.”
“You sweated enough,” Robert Jordan said. “I thought it was fear.”
“Fear, yes,” Agustín said. “Fear and the other. And in this life there is no stronger thing
than the other.”
Yes, Robert Jordan thought. We do it coldly but they do not, nor ever have. It is their
extra sacrament. Their old one that they had before the new religion came from the far
end of the Mediterranean, the one they have never abandoned but only suppressed and
hidden to bring it out again in wars and inquisitions. They are the people of the Auto de
Fe; the act of faith. Killing is something one must do, but ours are different from theirs.
And you, he thought, you have never been corrupted by it? You never had it in the
Sierra? Nor at Usera? Nor through all the time in Estremadura? Nor at any time? Qué
va, he told himself. At every train.
Stop making dubious literature about the Berbers and the old Iberians and admit that
you have liked to kill as all who are soldiers by choice have enjoyed it at some time
whether they lie about it or not. Anselmo does not like to because he is a hunter, not a
soldier. Don’t idealize him, either. Hunters kill animals and soldiers kill men. Don’t lie to
yourself, he thought. Nor make up literature about it. You have been tainted with it for a
long time now. And do not think against Anselmo either. He is a Christian. Something
very rare in Catholic countries.
But with Agustín I had thought it was fear, he thought. That natural fear before action.
So it was the other, too. Of course, he may be bragging now. There was plenty of fear. I
felt the fear under my hand. Well, it was time to stop talking.
“See if the gypsy brought food,” he said to Anselmo. “Do not let him come up. He is a
fool. Bring it yourself. And however much he brought, send back for more. I am hungry.”
24
Now the morning was late May, the sky was high and clear and the wind blew warm
on Robert Jordan’s shoulders. The snow was going fast and they were eating breakfast.
There were two big sandwiches of meat and the goaty cheese apiece, and Robert
Jordan had cut thick slices of onion with his clasp knife and put them on each side of the
meat and cheese between the chunks of bread.
“You will have a breath that will carry through the forest to the fascists,” Agustín said,
his own mouth full.
“Give me the wineskin and I will rinse the mouth,” Robert Jordan said, his mouth full of
meat, cheese, onion and chewed bread.
He had never been hungrier and he filled his mouth with wine, faintly tarry-tasting from
the leather bag, and swallowed. Then he took another big mouthful of wine, lifting the
bag up to let the jet of wine spurt into the back of his mouth, the wineskin touching the
needles of the blind of pine branches that covered the automatic rifle as he lifted his
hand, his head leaning against the pine branches as he bent it back to let the wine run
down.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway156
“Dost thou want this other sandwich?” Agustín asked him, handing it toward him
across the gun.
“No. Thank you. Eat it.”
“I cannot. I am not accustomed to eat in the morning.”
“You do not want it, truly?”
“Nay. Take it.”
Robert Jordan took it and laid it on his lap while he got the onion out of his side jacket
pocket where the grenades were and opened his knife to slice it. He cut off a thin sliver
of the surface that had dirtied in his pocket, then cut a thick slice. An outer segment fell
and he picked it up and bent the circle together and put it into the sandwich.
“Eatest thou always onions for breakfast?” Agustín asked.
“When there are any.”
“Do all in thy country do this?”
“Nay,” Robert Jordan said. “It is looked on badly there.”
“I am glad,” Agustín said. “I had always considered America a civilized country.”
“What hast thou against the onion?”
“The odor. Nothing more. Otherwise it is like the rose.”
Robert Jordan grinned at him with his mouth full.
“Like the rose,” he said. “Mighty like the rose. A rose is a rose is an onion.”
“Thy onions are affecting thy brain,” Agustín said. “Take care.”
“An onion is an onion is an onion,” Robert Jordan said cheerily and, he thought, a
stone is a stein is a rock is a boulder is a pebble.
“Rinse thy mouth with wine,” Agustín said. “Thou art very rare, Inglés. There is great
difference between thee and the last dynamiter who worked with us.”
“There is one great difference.”
“Tell it to me.”
“I am alive and he is dead,” Robert Jordan said. Then: what’s the matter with you? he
thought. Is that the way to talk? Does food make you that slap happy? What are you,
drunk on onions? Is that all it means to you, now? It never meant much, he told himself
truly. You tried to make it mean something, but it never did. There is no need to lie in the
time that is left.
“No,” he said, seriously now. “That one was a man who had suffered greatly.”
“And thou? Hast thou not suffered?”
“No,” said Robert Jordan. “I am of those who suffer little.”
“Me also,” Agustín told him. “There are those who suffer and those who do not. I suffer
very little.”
“Less bad,” Robert Jordan tipped up the wineskin again. “And with this, less.”
“I suffer for others.”
“As all good men should.”
“But for myself very little.”
“Hast thou a wife?”
“No.”
“Me neither.”
“But now you have the Maria.”
“Yes.”
“There is a rare thing,” Agustín said. “Since she came to us at the train the Pilar has
kept her away from all as fiercely as though she were in a convent of Carmelites. You
cannot imagine with what fierceness she guarded her. You come, and she gives her to
thee as a present. How does that seem to thee?”
“It was not thus.”
“How was it, then?”
“She has put her in my care.”
“And thy care is to joder with her all night?”
“With luck.”
“What a manner to care for one.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway157
“You do not understand that one can take good care of one thus?”
“Yes, but such care could have been furnished by any one of us.”
“Let us not talk of it any more,” Robert Jordan said. “I care for her seriously.”
“Seriously?”
“As there can be nothing more serious in this world.”
“And afterwards? After this of the bridge?”
“She goes with me.”
“Then,” Agustín said. “That no one speaks of it further and that the two of you go with
all luck.”
He lifted the leather wine bag and took a long pull, then handed it to Robert Jordan.
“One thing more, Inglés,” he said.
“Of course.”
“I have cared much for her, too.”
Robert Jordan put his hand on his shoulder.
“Much,” Agustín said. “Much. More than one is able to imagine.”
“I can imagine.”
“She has made an impression on me that does not dissipate.”
“I can imagine.”
“Look. I say this to thee in all seriousness.”
“Say it.”
“I have never touched her nor had anything to do with her but I care for her greatly.
Inglés, do not treat her lightly. Because she sleeps with thee she is no whore.”
“I will care for her.”
“I believe thee. But more. You do not understand how such a girl would be if there had
been no revolution. You have much responsibility. This one, truly, has suffered much.
She is not as we are.”
“I will marry her.”
“Nay. Not that. There is no need for that under the revolution. But—” he nodded his
head—”it would be better.”
“I will marry her,” Robert Jordan said and could feel his throat swelling as he said it. “I
care for her greatly.”
“Later,” Agustín said. “When it is convenient. The important thing is to have the
intention.”
“I have it.”
“Listen,” Agustín said. “I am speaking too much of a matter in which I have no right to
intervene, but hast thou known many girls of this country?”
“A few.”
“Whores?”
“Some who were not.”
“How many?”
“Several.”
“And did you sleep with them?”
“No.”
“You see?”
“Yes.”
“What I mean is that this Maria does not do this lightly.”
“Nor I.”
“If I thought you did I would have shot you last night as you lay with her. For this we kill
much here.”
“Listen, old one,” Robert Jordan said. “It is because of the lack of time that there has
been informality. What we do not have is time. Tomorrow we must fight. To me that is
nothing. But for the Maria and me it means that we must live all of our life in this time.”
“And a day and a night is little time,” Agustín said.
“Yes. But there has been yesterday and the night before and last night.”
“Look,” Agustín said. “If I can aid thee.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway158
“No. We are all right.”
“If I could do anything for thee or for the cropped head—”
“No.”
“Truly, there is little one man can do for another.”
“No. There is much.”
“What?”
“No matter what passes today and tomorrow in respect to combat, give me thy
confidence and obey even though the orders may appear wrong.”
“You have my confidence. Since this of the cavalry and the sending away of the
horse.”
“That was nothing. You see that we are working for one thing. To win the war. Unless
we win, all other things are futile. Tomorrow we have a thing of great importance. Of true
importance. Also we will have combat. In combat there must be discipline. For many
things are not as they appear. Discipline must come from trust and confidence.”
Agustín spat on the ground.
“The Maria and all such things are apart,” he said. “That you and the Maria should
make use of what time there is as two human beings. If I can aid thee I am at thy orders.
But for the thing of tomorrow I will obey thee blindly. If it is necessary that one should die
for the thing of tomorrow one goes gladly and with the heart light.”
“Thus do I feel,” Robert Jordan said. “But to hear it from thee brings pleasure.”
“And more,” Agustín said. “That one above,” he pointed toward Primitivo, “is a
dependable value. The Pilar is much, much more than thou canst imagine. The old man
Anselmo, also. Andrés also. Eladio also. Very quiet, but a dependable element. And
Fernando. I do not know how thou hast appreciated him. It is true he is heavier than
mercury. He is fuller of boredom than a steer drawing a cart on the highroad. But to fight
and to do as he is told. Es muy hombre! Thou wilt see.”
“We are lucky.”
“No. We have two weak elements. The gypsy and Pablo. But the band of Sordo are as
much better than we are as we are better than goat manure.”
“All is well then.”
“Yes,” Agustín said. “But I wish it was for today.”
“Me, too. To finish with it. But it is not.”
“Do you think it will be bad?”
“It can be.”
“But thou are very cheerful now, Inglés.”
“Yes.”
“Me also. In spite of this of the Maria and all.”
“Do you know why?”
“No.”
“Me neither. Perhaps it is the day. The day is good.”
“Who knows? Perhaps it is that we will have action.”
“I think it is that,” Robert Jordan said. “But not today. Of all things; of all importance we
must avoid it today.”
As he spoke he heard something. It was a noise far off that came above the sound of
the warm wind in the trees. He could not be sure and he held his mouth open and
listened, glancing up at Primitivo as he did so. He thought he heard it but then it was
gone. The wind was blowing in the pines and now Robert Jordan strained all of himself
to listen. Then he heard it faintly coming down the wind.
“It is nothing tragic with me,” he heard Agustín say. “That I should never have the
Maria is nothing. I will go with the whores as always.”
“Shut up,” he said, not listening, and lying beside him, his head having been turned
away. Agustín looked over at him suddenly.
“Qué pasa?” he asked.
Robert Jordan put his hand over his own mouth and went on listening. There it came
again. It came faint, muted, dry and far away. But there was no mistaking it now. It was“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway159
the precise, crackling, curling roll of automatic rifle fire. It sounded as though pack after
pack of miniature firecrackers were going off at a distance that was almost out of
hearing.
Robert Jordan looked up at Primitivo who had his head up now, his face looking
toward them, his hand cupped to his ear. As he looked Primitivo pointed up the
mountain toward the highest country.
“They are fighting at El Sordo’s,” Robert Jordan said.
“Then let us go to aid them,” Agustín said. “Collect the people. Vamonos.”
“No,” Robert Jordan said. “We stay here.”
25
Robert Jordan looked up at where Primitivo stood now in his lookout post, holding his
rifle and pointing. He nodded his head but the man kept pointing, putting his hand to his
ear and then pointing insistently and as though he could not possibly have been
understood.
“Do you stay with this gun and unless it is sure, sure, sure that they are coming in do
not fire. And then not until they reach that shrub,” Robert Jordan pointed. “Do you
understand?”
“Yes. But—”
“No but. I will explain to thee later. I go to Primitivo.”
Anselmo was by him and he said to the old man:
“Viejo, stay there with Agustín with the gun.” He spoke slowly and unhurriedly. “He
must not fire unless cavalry is actually entering. If they merely present themselves he
must let them alone as we did before. If he must fire, hold the legs of the tripod firm for
him and hand him the pans when they are empty.”
“Good,” the old man said. “And La Granja?”
“Later.”
Robert Jordan climbed up, over and around the gray boulders that were wet now
under his hands as he pulled himself up. The sun was melting the snow on them fast.
The tops of the boulders were drying and as he climbed he looked across the country
and saw the pine woods and the long open glade and the dip of the country before the
high mountains beyond. Then he stood beside Primitivo in a hollow behind two boulders
and the short, brownfaced man said to him, “They are attacking Sordo. What is it that
we do?”
“Nothing,” Robert Jordan said.
He heard the firing clearly here and as he looked across the country, he saw, far off,
across the distant valley where the country rose steeply again, a troop of cavalry ride
out of the timber and cross the snowy slope riding uphill in the direction of the firing. He
saw the oblong double line of men and horses dark against the snow as they forced at
an angle up the hill. He watched the double line top the ridge and go into the farther
timber.
“We have to aid them,” Primitivo said. His voice was dry and flat.
“It is impossible,” Robert Jordan told him. “I have expected this all morning.”
“How?”
“They went to steal horses last night. The snow stopped and they tracked them up
there.”
“But we have to aid them,” Primitivo said. “We cannot leave them alone to this. Those
are our comrades.”
Robert Jordan put his hand on the other man’s shoulder.
“We can do nothing,” he said. “If we could I would do it.”
“There is a way to reach there from above. We can take that way with the horses and
the two guns. This one below and thine. We can aid them thus.”
“Listen—” Robert Jordan said.
“That is what I listen to,” Primitivo said.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway160
The firing was rolling in overlapping waves. Then they heard the noise of hand
grenades heavy and sodden in the dry rolling of the automatic rifle fire.
“They are lost,” Robert Jordan said. “They were lost when the snow stopped. If we go
there we are lost, too. It is impossible to divide what force we have.”
There was a gray stubble of beard stippled over Primitivo’s jaws, his lip and his neck.
The rest of his face was flat brown with a broken, flattened nose and deep-set gray
eyes, and watching him Robert Jordan saw the stubble twitching at the corners of his
mouth and over the cord of his throat.
“Listen to it,” he said. “It is a massacre.”
“If they have surrounded the hollow it is that,” Robert Jordan said. “Some may have
gotten out.”
“Coming on them now we could take them from behind,” Primitivo said. “Let four of us
go with the horses.”
“And then what? What happens after you take them from behind?”
“We join with Sordo.”
“To die there? Look at the sun. The day is long.”
The sky was high and cloudless and the sun was hot on their backs. There were big
bare patches now on the southern slope of the open glade below them and the snow
was all dropped from the pine trees. The boulders below them that had been wet as the
snow melted were steaming faintly now in the hot sun.
“You have to stand it,” Robert Jordan said. “Hay que aguantarse. There are things like
this in a war.”
“But there is nothing we can do? Truly?” Primitivo looked at him and Robert Jordan
knew he trusted him. “Thou couldst not send me and another with the small machine
gun?”
“It would be useless,” Robert Jordan said.
He thought he saw something that he was looking for but it was a hawk that slid down
into the wind and then rose above the line of the farthest pine woods. “It would be
useless if we all went,” he said.
Just then the firing doubled in intensity and in it was the heavy bumping of the hand
grenades.
“Oh, obscenity them,” Primitivo said with an absolute devoutness of blasphemy, tears
in his eyes and his cheeks twitching. “Oh, God and the Virgin, obscenity them in the milk
of their filth.”
“Calm thyself,” Robert Jordan said. “You will be fighting them soon enough. Here
comes the woman.”
Pilar was climbing up to them, making heavy going of it in the boulders.
Primitivo kept saying. “Obscenity them. Oh, God and the Virgin, befoul them,” each
time for firing rolled down the wind, and Robert Jordan climbed down to help Pilar up.
“Qué tal, woman,” he said, taking hold of both her wrists and hoisting as she climbed
heavily over the last boulder.
“Thy binoculars,” she said and lifted their strap over her head. “So it has come to
Sordo?”
“Yes.”
“Pobre,” she said in commiseration. “Poor Sordo.”
She was breathing heavily from the climb and she took hold of Robert Jordan’s hand
and gripped it tight in hers as she looked out over the country.
“How does the combat seem?”
“Bad. Very bad.”
“He’s jodido?”
“I believe so.”
“Pobre,” she said. “Doubtless because of the horses?”
“Probably.”
“Pobre,” Pilar said. Then, “Rafael recounted me all of an entire novel of dung about
cavalry. What came?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway161
“A patrol and part of a squadron.”
“Up to what point?”
Robert Jordan pointed out where the patrol had stopped and showed her where the
gun was hidden. From where they stood they could just see one of Agustín’s boots
protruding from the rear of the blind.
“The gypsy said they rode to where the gun muzzle pressed against the chest of the
horse of the leader,” Pilar said. “What a race! Thy glasses were in the cave.”
“Have you packed?”
“All that can be taken. Is there news of Pablo?”
“He was forty minutes ahead of the cavalry. They took his trail.”
Pilar grinned at him. She still held his hand. Now she dropped it. “They’ll never see
him,” she said. “Now for Sordo. Can we do anything?”
“Nothing.”
“Pobre,” she said. “I was fond of Sordo. Thou art sure, sure that he is jodido?”
“Yes. I have seen much cavalry.”
“More than were here?”
“Another full troop on their way up there.”
“Listen to it,” Pilar said. “Pobre, pobre Sordo.”
They listened to the firing.
“Primitivo wanted to go up there,” Robert Jordan said.
“Art thou crazy?” Pilar said to the flat-faced man. “What kind of locos are we producing
here?”
“I wish to aid them.”
“Qué va,” Pilar said. “Another romantic. Dost thou not believe thou wilt die quick
enough here without useless voyages?”
Robert Jordan looked at her, at the heavy brown face with the high Indian
cheekbones, the wide-set dark eyes and the laughing mouth with the heavy, bitter upper
lip.
“Thou must act like a man,” she said to Primitivo. “A grown man. You with your gray
hairs and all.”
“Don’t joke at me,” Primitivo said sullenly. “If a man has a little heart and a little
imagination—”
“He should learn to control them,” Pilar said. “Thou wilt die soon enough with us.
There is no need to seek that with strangers. As for thy imagination. The gypsy has
enough for all. What a novel he told me.”
“If thou hadst seen it thou wouldst not call it a novel,” Primitivo said. “There was a
moment of great gravity.”
“Qué va,” Pilar said. “Some cavalry rode here and they rode away. And you all make
yourselves a heroism. It is to this we have come with so much inaction.”
“And this of Sordo is not grave?” Primitivo said contemptuously now. He suffered
visibly each time the firing came down the wind and he wanted either to go to the
combat or have Pilar go and leave him alone.
“Total, qué?” Pilar said. “It has come so it has come. Don’t lose thy cojones for the
misfortune of another.”
“Go defile thyself,” Primitivo said. “There are women of a stupidity and brutality that is
insupportable.”
“In order to support and aid those men poorly equipped for procreation,” Pilar said, “if
there is nothing to see I am going.”
Just then Robert Jordan heard the plane high overhead. He looked up and in the high
sky it looked to be the same observation plane that he had seen earlier in the morning.
Now it was returning from the direction of the lines and it was moving in the direction of
the high country where El Sordo was being attacked.
“There is the bad luck bird,” Pilar said. “Will it see what goes on there?”
“Surely,” Robert Jordan said. “If they are not blind.”
They watched the plane moving high and silvery and steady in the sunlight. It was“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway162
coming from the left and they could see the round disks of light the two propellers made.
“Keep down,” Robert Jordan said.
Then the plane was overhead, its shadows passing over the open glade, the throbbing
reaching its maximum of portent. Then it was past and headed toward the top of the
valley. They watched it go steadily on its course until it was just out of sight and then
they saw it coming back in a wide dipping circle, to circle twice over the high country and
then disappear in the direction of Segovia.
Robert Jordan looked at Pilar. There was perspiration on her forehead and she shook
her head: She had been holding her lower lip between her teeth.
“For each one there is something,” she said. “For me it is those.”
“Thou hast not caught my fear?” Primitivo said sarcastically.
“Nay,” she put her hand on his shoulder. “Thou hast no fear to catch. I know that. I am
sorry I joked too roughly with thee. We are all in the same caldron.” Then she spoke to
Robert Jordan. “I will send up food and wine. Dost need anything more?”
“Not in this moment. Where are the others?”
“Thy reserve is intact below with the horses,” she grinned. “Everything is out of sight.
Everything to go is ready. Maria is with thy material.”
“If by any chance we should have aviation keep her in the cave.”
“Yes, my Lord Inglés,” Pilar said. “Thy gypsy (I give him to thee) I have sent to gather
mushrooms to cook with the hares. There are many mushrooms now and it seemed to
me we might as well eat the hares although they would be better tomorrow or the day
after.”
“I think it is best to eat them,” Robert Jordan said, and Pilar put her big hand on his
shoulder where the strap of the submachine gun crossed his chest, then reached up
and mussed his hair with her fingers. “What an Inglés,” Pilar said. “I will send the Maria
with the puchero when they are cooked.”
The firing from far away and above had almost died out and now there was only an
occasional shot.
“You think it is over?” Pilar asked.
“No,” Robert Jordan said. “From the sound that we have heard they have attacked and
been beaten off. Now I would say the attackers have them surrounded. They have taken
cover and they wait for the planes.”
Pilar spoke to Primitivo, “Thou. Dost understand there was no intent to insult thee?”
“Ya lo sé,” said Primitivo. “I have put up with worse than that from thee. Thou hast a
vile tongue. But watch thy mouth, woman. Sordo was a good comrade of mine.”
“And not of mine?” Pilar asked him. “Listen, flat face. In war one cannot say what one
feels. We have enough of our own without taking Sordo’s.”
Primitivo was still sullen.
“You should take a physic,” Pilar told him. “Now I go to prepare the meal.”
“Did you bring the documentation of the requeté?” Robert Jordan asked her.
“How stupid I am,” she said. “I forgot it. I will send the Maria.”
26
It was three o’clock in the afternoon before the planes came. The snow had all been
gone by noon and the rocks were hot now in the sun. There were no clouds in the sky
and Robert Jordan sat in the rocks with his shirt off browning his back in the sun and
reading the letters that had been in the pockets of the dead cavalryman. From time to
time he would stop reading to look across the open slope to the line of the timber, look
over the high country above and then return to the letters. No more cavalry had
appeared. At intervals there would be the sound of a shot from the direction of El
Sordo’s camp. But the firing was desultory.
From examining his military papers he knew the boy was from Tafalla in Navarra,
twenty-one years old, unmarried, and the son of a blacksmith. His regiment was the Nth
cavalry, which surprised Robert Jordan, for he had believed that regiment to be in the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway163
North. He was a Carlist, and he had been wounded at the fighting for Irun at the start of
the war.
I’ve probably seen him run through the streets ahead of the bulls at the feria in
Pamplona, Robert Jordan thought. You never kill any one that you want to kill in a war,
he said to himself. Well, hardly ever, he amended and went on reading the letters.
The first letters he read were very formal, very carefully written and dealt almost
entirely with local happenings. They were from his sister and Robert Jordan learned that
everything was all right in Tafalla, that father was well, that mother was the same as
always but with certain complaints about her back, that she hoped he was well and not
in too great danger and she was happy he was doing away with the Reds to liberate
Spain from the domination of the Marxist hordes. Then there was a list of those boys
from Tafalla who had been killed or badly wounded since she wrote last. She mentioned
ten who were killed. That is a great many for a town the size of Tafalla, Robert Jordan
thought.
There was quite a lot of religion in the letter and she prayed to Saint Anthony, to the
Blessed Virgin of Pilar, and to other Virgins to protect him and she wanted him never to
forget that he was also protected by the Sacred Heart of Jesus that he wore still, she
trusted, at all times over his own heart where it had been proven innumerable—this was
underlined—times to have the power of stopping bullets. She was as always his loving
sister Concha.
This letter was a little stained around the edges and Robert Jordan put it carefully
back with the military papers and opened a letter with a less severe handwriting. It was
from the boy’s novia, his fiancée, and it was quietly, formally, and completely hysterical
with concern for his safety. Robert Jordan read it through and then put all the letters
together with the papers into his hip pocket. He did not want to read the other letters.
I guess I’ve done my good deed for today, he said to himself. I guess you have all
right, he repeated.
“What are those you were reading?” Primitivo asked him.
“The documentation and the letters of that requeté we shot this morning. Do you want
to see it?”
“I can’t read,” Primitivo said. “Was there anything interesting?”
“No,” Robert Jordan told him. “They are personal letters.”
“How are things going where he came from? Can you tell from the letters?”
“They seem to be going all right,” Robert Jordan said. “There are many losses in his
town.” He looked down to where the blind for the automatic rifle had been changed a
little and improved after the snow melted. It looked convincing enough. He looked off
across the country.
“From what town is he?” Primitivo asked.
“Tafalla,” Robert Jordan told him.
All right, he said to himself. I’m sorry, if that does any good.
It doesn’t, he said to himself.
All right then, drop it, he said to himself.
All right, it’s dropped.
But it would not drop that easily. How many is that you have killed? he asked himself. I
don’t know. Do you think you have a right to kill any one? No. But I have to. How many
of those you have killed have been real fascists? Very few. But they are all the enemy to
whose force we are opposing force. But you like the people of Navarra better than those
of any other part of Spain. Yes. And you kill them. Yes. If you don’t believe it go down
there to the camp. Don’t you know it is wrong to kill? Yes. But you do it? Yes. And you
still believe absolutely that your cause is right? Yes.
It is right, he told himself, not reassuringly, but proudly. I believe in the people and
their right to govern themselves as they wish. But you mustn’t believe in killing, he told
himself. You must do it as a necessity but you must not believe in it. If you believe in it
the whole thing is wrong.
But how many do you suppose you have killed? I don’t know because I won’t keep“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway164
track. But do you know? Yes. How many? You can’t be sure how many. Blowing the
trains you kill many. Very many. But you can’t be sure. But of those you are sure of?
More than twenty. And of those how many were real fascists? Two that I am sure of.
Because I had to shoot them when we took them prisoners at Usera. And you did not
mind that? No. Nor did you like it? No. I decided never to do it again. I have avoided it. I
have avoided killing those who are unarmed.
Listen, he told himself. You better cut this out. This is very bad for you and for your
work. Then himself said back to him, You listen, see? Because you are doing something
very serious and I have to see you understand it all the time. I have to keep you straight
in your head. Because if you are not absolutely straight in your head you have no right
to do the things you do for all of them are crimes and no man has a right to take another
man’s life unless it is to prevent something worse happening to other people. So get it
straight and do not lie to yourself.
But I won’t keep a count of people I have killed as though it were a trophy record or a
disgusting business like notches in a gun, he told himself. I have a right to not keep
count and I have a right to forget them.
No, himself said. You have no right to forget anything. You have no right to shut your
eyes to any of it nor any right to forget any of it nor to soften it nor to change it.
Shut up, he told himself. You’re getting awfully pompous.
Nor ever to deceive yourself about it, himself went on.
All right, he told himself. Thanks for all the good advice and is it all right for me to love
Maria?
Yes, himself said.
Even if there isn’t supposed to be any such thing as love in a purely materialistic
conception of society?
Since when did you ever have any such conception? himself asked. Never. And you
never could have. You’re not a real Marxist and you know it. You believe in Liberty,
Equality and Fraternity. You believe in Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness. Don’t
ever kid yourself with too much dialectics. They are for some but not for you. You have
to know them in order not to be a sucker. You have put many things in abeyance to win
a war. If this war is lost all of those things are lost.
But afterwards you can discard what you do not believe in. There is plenty you do not
believe in and plenty that you do believe in.
And another thing. Don’t ever kid yourself about loving some one. It is just that most
people are not lucky enough ever to have it. You never had it before and now you have
it. What you have with Maria, whether it lasts just through today and a part of tomorrow,
or whether it lasts for a long life is the most important thing that can happen to a human
being. There will always be people who say it does not exist because they cannot have
it. But I tell you it is true and that you have it and that you are lucky even if you die
tomorrow.
Cut out the dying stuff, he said to himself. That’s not the way we talk. That’s the way
our friends the anarchists talk. Whenever things get really bad they want to set fire to
something and to die. It’s a very odd kind of mind they have. Very odd. Well, we’re
getting through today, old timer, he told himself. It’s nearly three o’clock now and there
is going to be some food sooner or later. They are still shooting up at Sordo’s, which
means that they have him surrounded and are waiting to bring up more people,
probably. Though they have to make it before dark.
I wonder what it is like up at Sordo’s. That’s what we all have to expect, given enough
time. I imagine it is not too jovial up at Sordo’s. We certainly got Sordo into a fine jam
with that horse business. How does it go in Spanish? Un callejón sin salida. A
passageway with no exit. I suppose I could go through with it all right. You only have to
do it once and it is soon over with. But wouldn’t it be luxury to fight in a war some time
where, when you were surrounded, you could surrender? Estamos copados. We are
surrounded. That was the great panic cry of this war. Then the next thing was that you
were shot; with nothing bad before if you were lucky. Sordo wouldn’t be lucky that way.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway165
Neither would they when the time ever came.
It was three o’clock. Then he heard the far-off, distant throbbing and, looking up, he
saw the planes.
27
El Sordo was making his fight on a hilltop. He did not like this hill and when he saw it
he thought it had the shape of a chancre. But he had had no choice except this hill and
he had picked it as far away as he could see it and galloped for it, the automatic rifle
heavy on his back, the horse laboring, barrel heaving between his thighs, the sack of
grenades swinging against one side, the sack of automatic rifle pans banging against
the other, and Joaquín and Ignacio halting and firing, halting and firing to give him time
to get the gun in place.
There had still been snow then, the snow that had ruined them, and when his horse
was hit so that he wheezed in a slow, jerking, climbing stagger up the last part of the
crest, splattering the snow with a bright, pulsing jet, Sordo had hauled him along by the
bridle, the reins over his shoulder as he climbed. He climbed as hard as he could with
the bullets spatting on the rocks, with the two sacks heavy on his shoulders, and then,
holding the horse by the mane, had shot him quickly, expertly, and tenderly just where
he had needed him, so that the horse pitched, head forward down to plug a gap
between two rocks. He had gotten the gun to firing over the horse’s back and he fired
two pans, the gun clattering, the empty shells pitching into the snow, the smell of burnt
hair from the burnt hide where the hot muzzle rested, him firing at what came up to the
hill, forcing them to scatter for cover, while all the time there was a chill in his back from
not knowing what was behind him. Once the last of the five men had reached the hilltop
the chill went out of his back and he had saved the pans he had left until he would need
them.
There were two more horses dead along the slope and three more were dead here on
the hilltop. He had only succeeded in stealing three horses last night and one had bolted
when they tried to mount him bareback in the corral at the camp when the first shooting
had started.
Of the five men who had reached the hilltop three were wounded. Sordo was wounded
in the calf of his leg and in two places in his left arm. He was very thirsty, his wounds
had stiffened, and one of the wounds in his left arm was very painful. He also had a bad
headache and as he lay waiting for the planes to come he thought of a joke in Spanish.
It was, “Hay que tomar la muerte como si fuera aspirina,” which means, “You will have
to take death as an aspirin.” But he did not make the joke aloud. He grinned somewhere
inside the pain in his head and inside the nausea that came whenever he moved his
arm and looked around at what there was left of his band.
The five men were spread out like the points of a five-pointed star. They had dug with
their knees and hands and made mounds in front of their heads and shoulders with the
dirt and piles of stones. Using this cover, they were linking the individual mounds up with
stones and dirt. Joaquín, who was eighteen years old, had a steel helmet that he dug
with and he passed dirt in it.
He had gotten this helmet at the blowing up of the train. It had a bullet hole through it
and every one had always joked at him for keeping it. But he had hammered the jagged
edges of the bullet hole smooth and driven a wooden plug into it and then cut the plug
off and smoothed it even with the metal inside the helmet.
When the shooting started he had clapped this helmet on his head so hard it banged
his head as though he had been hit with a casserole and, in the last lung-aching, leg-
dead, mouth-dry, bulletspatting, bullet-cracking, bullet-singing run up the final slope of
the hill after his horse was killed, the helmet had seemed to weigh a great amount and
to ring his bursting forehead with an iron band. But he had kept it. Now he dug with it in
a steady, almost machinelike desperation. He had not yet been hit.
“It serves for something finally,” Sordo said to him in his deep, throaty voice.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway166
“Resistir y fortificar es vencer,” Joaquín said, his mouth stiff with the dryness of fear
which surpassed the normal thirst of battle. It was one of the slogans of the Communist
party and it meant, “Hold out and fortify, and you will win.”
Sordo looked away and down the slope at where a cavalryman was sniping from
behind a boulder. He was very fond of this boy and he was in no mood for slogans.
“What did you say?”
One of the men turned from the building that he was doing. This man was lying flat on
his face, reaching carefully up with his hands to put a rock in place while keeping his
chin flat against the ground.
Joaquín repeated the slogan in his dried-up boy’s voice without checking his digging
for a moment.
“What was the last word?” the man with his chin on the ground asked.
“Vencer,” the boy said. “Win.”
“Mierda,” the man with his chin on the ground said.
“There is another that applies to here,” Joaquín said, bringing them out as though they
were talismans, “Pasionaria says it is better to die on your feet than to live on your
knees.”
“Mierda again,” the man said and another man said, over his shoulder, “We’re on our
bellies, not our knees.”
“Thou. Communist. Do you know your Pasionaria has a son thy age in Russia since
the start of the movement?”
“It’s a lie,” Joaquín said.
“Qué va, it’s a lie,” the other said. “The dynamiter with the rare name told me. He was
of thy party, too. Why should he lie?”
“It’s a lie,” Joaquín said. “She would not do such a thing as keep a son hidden in
Russia out of the war.”
“I wish I were in Russia,” another of Sordo’s men said. “Will not thy Pasionaria send
me now from here to Russia, Communist?”
“If thou believest so much in thy Pasionaria, get her to get us off this hill,” one of the
men who had a bandaged thigh said.
“The fascists will do that,” the man with his chin in the dirt said.
“Do not speak thus,” Joaquín said to him.
“Wipe the pap of your mother’s breasts off thy lips and give me a hatful of that dirt,”
the man with his chin on the ground said. “No one of us will see the sun go down this
night.”
El Sordo was thinking: It is shaped like a chancre. Or the breast of a young girl with no
nipple. Or the top cone of a volcano. You have never seen a volcano, he thought. Nor
will you ever see one. And this hill is like a chancre. Let the volcanos alone. It’s late now
for the volcanos.
He looked very carefully around the withers of the dead horse and there was a quick
hammering of firing from behind a boulder well down the slope and he heard the bullets
from the submachine gun thud into the horse. He crawled along behind the horse and
looked out of the angle between the horse’s hindquarters and the rock. There were
three bodies on the slope just below him where they had fallen when the fascists had
rushed the crest under cover of the automatic rifle and submachine gunfire and he and
the others had broken down the attack by throwing and rolling down hand grenades.
There were other bodies that he could not see on the other sides of the hill crest. There
was no dead ground by which attackers could approach the summit and Sordo knew
that as long as his ammunition and grenades held out and he had as many as four men
they could not get him out of there unless they brought up a trench mortar. He did not
know whether they had sent to La Granja for a trench mortar. Perhaps they had not,
because surely, soon, the planes would come. It had been four hours since the
observation plane had flown over them.
This hill is truly like a chancre, Sordo thought, and we are the very pus of it. But we
killed many when they made that stupidness. How could they think that they would take“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway167
us thus? They have such modern armament that they lose all their sense with
overconfidence. He had killed the young officer who had led the assault with a grenade
that had gone bouncing and rolling down the slope as they came up it, running, bent half
over. In the yellow flash and gray roar of smoke he had seen the officer dive forward to
where he lay now like a heavy, broken bundle of old clothing marking the farthest point
that the assault had reached. Sordo looked at this body and then, down the hill, at the
others.
They are brave but stupid people, he thought. But they have sense enough now not to
attack us again until the planes come. Unless, of course, they have a mortar coming. It
would be easy with a mortar. The mortar was the normal thing and he knew that they
would die as soon as a mortar came up, but when he thought of the planes coming up
he felt as naked on that hilltop as though all of his clothing and even his skin had been
removed. There is no nakeder thing than I feel, he thought. A flayed rabbit is as well
covered as a bear in comparison. But why should they bring planes? They could get us
out of here with a trench mortar easily. They are proud of their planes, though, and they
will probably bring them. Just as they were so proud of their automatic weapons that
they made that stupidness. But undoubtedly they must have sent for a mortar too.
One of the men fired. Then jerked the bolt and fired again, quickly.
“Save thy cartridges,” Sordo said.
“One of the sons of the great whore tried to reach that boulder,” the man pointed.
“Did you hit him?” Sordo asked, turning his head with difficulty.
“Nay,” the man said. “The fornicator ducked back.”
“Who is a whore of whores is Pilar,” the man with his chin in the dirt said. “That whore
knows we are dying here.”
“She could do no good,” Sordo said. The man had spoken on the side of his good ear
and he had heard him without turning his head. “What could she do?”
“Take these sluts from the rear.”
“Qué va,” Sordo said. “They are spread around a hillside. How would she come on
them? There are a hundred and fifty of them. Maybe more now.”
“But if we hold out until dark,” Joaquín said.
“And if Christmas comes on Easter,” the man with his chin on the ground said.
“And if thy aunt had cojones she would be thy uncle,” another said to him. “Send for
thy Pasionaria. She alone can help us.”
“I do not believe that about the son,” Joaquín said. “Or if he is there he is training to be
an aviator or something of that sort.”
“He is hidden there for safety,” the man told him.
“He is studying dialectics. Thy Pasionaria has been there. So have Lister and Modesto
and others. The one with the rare name told me.”
“That they should go to study and return to aid us,” Joaquín said.
“That they should aid us now,” another man said. “That all the cruts of Russian
sucking swindlers should aid us now.” He fired and said, “Me cago en tal; I missed him
again.”
“Save thy cartridges and do not talk so much or thou wilt be very thirsty,” Sordo said.
“There is no water on this hill.”
“Take this,” the man said and rolling on his side he pulled a wineskin that he wore
slung from his shoulder over his head and handed it to Sordo. “Wash thy mouth out, old
one. Thou must have much thirst with thy wounds.”
“Let all take it,” Sordo said.
“Then I will have some first,” the owner said and squirted a long stream into his mouth
before he handed the leather bottle around.
“Sordo, when thinkest thou the planes will come?” the man with his chin in the dirt
asked.
“Any time,” said Sordo. “They should have come before.”
“Do you think these sons of the great whore will attack again?”
“Only if the planes do not come.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway168
He did not think there was any need to speak about the mortar. They would know it
soon enough when the mortar came.
“God knows they’ve enough planes with what we saw yesterday.”
“Too many,” Sordo said.
His head hurt very much and his arm was stiffening so that the pain of moving it was
almost unbearable. He looked up at the bright, high, blue early summer sky as he raised
the leather wine bottle with his good arm. He was fifty-two years old and he was sure
this was the last time he would see that sky.
He was not at all afraid of dying but he was angry at being trapped on this hill which
was only utilizable as a place to die. If we could have gotten clear, he thought. If we
could have made them come up the long valley or if we could have broken loose across
the road it would have been all right. But this chancre of a hill. We must use it as well as
we can and we have used it very well so far.
If he had known how many men in history have had to use a hill to die on it would not
have cheered him any for, in the moment he was passing through, men are not
impressed by what has happened to other men in similar circumstances any more than
a widow of one day is helped by the knowledge that other loved husbands have died.
Whether one has fear of it or not, one’s death is difficult to accept. Sordo had accepted it
but there was no sweetness in its acceptance even at fifty-two, with three wounds and
him surrounded on a hill.
He joked about it to himself but he looked at the sky and at the far mountains and he
swallowed the wine and he did not want it. If one must die, he thought, and clearly one
must, I can die. But I hate it.
Dying was nothing and he had no picture of it nor fear of it in his mind. But living was a
field of grain blowing in the wind on the side of a hill. Living was a hawk in the sky.
Living was an earthen jar of water in the dust of the threshing with the grain flailed out
and the chaff blowing. Living was a horse between your legs and a carbine under one
leg and a hill and a valley and a stream with trees along it and the far side of the valley
and the hills beyond.
Sordo passed the wine bottle back and nodded his head in thanks. He leaned forward
and patted the dead horse on the shoulder where the muzzle of the automatic rifle had
burned the hide. He could still smell the burnt hair. He thought how he had held the
horse there, trembling, with the fire around them, whispering and cracking, over and
around them like a curtain, and had carefully shot him just at the intersection of the
cross-lines between the two eyes and the ears. Then as the horse pitched down he had
dropped down behind his warm, wet back to get the gun to going as they came up the
hill.
“Eras mucho caballo,” he said, meaning, “Thou wert plenty of horse.”
El Sordo lay now on his good side and looked up at the sky. He was lying on a heap of
empty cartridge hulls but his head was protected by the rock and his body lay in the lee
of the horse. His wounds had stiffened badly and he had much pain and he felt too tired
to move.
“What passes with thee, old one?” the man next to him asked.
“Nothing. I am taking a little rest.”
“Sleep,” the other said. “They will wake us when they come.”
Just then some one shouted from down the slope.
“Listen, bandits!” the voice came from behind the rocks where the closest automatic
rifle was placed. “Surrender now before the planes blow you to pieces.”
“What is it he says?” Sordo asked.
Joaquín told him. Sordo rolled to one side and pulled himself up so that he was
crouched behind the gun again.
“Maybe the planes aren’t coming,” he said. “Don’t answer them and do not fire. Maybe
we can get them to attack again.”
“If we should insult them a little?” the man who had spoken to Joaquín about La
Pasionaria’s son in Russia asked.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway169
“No,” Sordo said. “Give me thy big pistol. Who has a big pistol?”
“Here.”
“Give it to me.” Crouched on his knees he took the big 9 mm. Star and fired one shot
into the ground beside the dead horse, waited, then fired again four times at irregular
intervals. Then he waited while he counted sixty and then fired a final shot directly into
the body of the dead horse. He grinned and handed back the pistol.
“Reload it,” he whispered, “and that every one should keep his mouth shut and no one
shoot.”
“Bandidos!” the voice shouted from behind the rocks.
No one spoke on the hill.
“Bandidos! Surrender now before we blow thee to little pieces.”
“They’re biting,” Sordo whispered happily.
As he watched, a man showed his head over the top of the rocks. There was no shot
from the hilltop and the head went down again. El Sordo waited, watching, but nothing
more happened. He turned his head and looked at the others who were all watching
down their sectors of the slope. As he looked at them the others shook their heads.
“Let no one move,” he whispered.
“Sons of the great whore,” the voice came now from behind the rocks again.
“Red swine. Mother rapers. Eaters of the milk of thy fathers.”
Sordo grinned. He could just hear the bellowed insults by turning his good ear. This is
better than the aspirin, he thought. How many will we get? Can they be that foolish?
The voice had stopped again and for three minutes they heard nothing and saw no
movement. Then the sniper behind the boulder a hundred yards down the slope
exposed himself and fired. The bullet hit a rock and ricocheted with a sharp whine. Then
Sordo saw a man, bent double, run from the shelter of the rocks where the automatic
rifle was across the open ground to the big boulder behind which the sniper was hidden.
He almost dove behind the boulder.
Sordo looked around. They signalled to him that there was no movement on the other
slopes. El Sordo grinned happily and shook his head. This is ten times better than the
aspirin, he thought, and he waited, as happy as only a hunter can be happy.
Below on the slope the man who had run from the pile of stones to the shelter of the
boulder was speaking to the sniper.
“Do you believe it?”
“I don’t know,” the sniper said.
“It would be logical,” the man, who was the officer in command, said. “They are
surrounded. They have nothing to expect but to die.”
The sniper said nothing.
“What do you think?” the officer asked.
“Nothing,” the sniper said.
“Have you seen any movement since the shots?”
“None at all.”
The officer looked at his wrist watch. It was ten minutes to three o’clock.
“The planes should have come an hour ago,” he said. Just then another officer flopped
in behind the boulder. The sniper moved over to make room for him.
“Thou, Paco,” the first officer said. “How does it seem to thee?”
The second officer was breathing heavily from his sprint up and across the hillside
from the automatic rifle position.
“For me it is a trick,” he said.
“But if it is not? What a ridicule we make waiting here and laying siege to dead men.”
“We have done something worse than ridiculous already,” the second officer said.
“Look at that slope.”
He looked up the slope to where the dead were scattered close to the top. From
where he looked the line of the hilltop showed the scattered rocks, the belly, projecting
legs, shod hooves jutting out, of Sordo’s horse, and the fresh dirt thrown up by the
digging.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway170
“What about the mortars?” asked the second officer.
“They should be here in an hour. If not before.”
“Then wait for them. There has been enough stupidity already.”
“Bandidos!” the first officer shouted suddenly, getting to his feet and putting his head
well up above the boulder so that the crest of the hill looked much closer as he stood
upright. “Red swine! Cowards!”
The second officer looked at the sniper and shook his head. The sniper looked away
but his lips tightened.
The first officer stood there, his head all clear of the rock and with his hand on his
pistol butt. He cursed and vilified the hilltop. Nothing happened. Then he stepped clear
of the boulder and stood there looking up the hill.
“Fire, cowards, if you are alive,” he shouted. “Fire on one who has no fear of any Red
that ever came out of the belly of the great whore.”
This last was quite a long sentence to shout and the officer’s face was red and
congested as he finished.
The second officer, who was a thin sunburned man with quiet eyes, a thin, long-lipped
mouth and a stubble of beard over his hollow cheeks, shook his head again. It was this
officer who was shouting who had ordered the first assault. The young lieutenant who
was dead up the slope had been the best friend of this other lieutenant who was named
Paco Berrendo and who was listening to the shouting of the captain, who was obviously
in a state of exaltation.
“Those are the swine who shot my sister and my mother,” the captain said. He had a
red face and a blond, British-looking moustache and there was something wrong about
his eyes. They were a light blue and the lashes were light, too. As you looked at them
they seemed to focus slowly. Then “Reds,” he shouted. “Cowards!” and commenced
cursing again.
He stood absolutely clear now and, sighting carefully, fired his pistol at the only target
that the hilltop presented: the dead horse that had belonged to Sordo. The bullet threw
up a puff of dirt fifteen yards below the horse. The captain fired again. The bullet hit a
rock and sung off.
The captain stood there looking at the hilltop. The Lieutenant Berrendo was looking at
the body of the other lieutenant just below the summit. The sniper was looking at the
ground under his eyes. Then he looked up at the captain.
“There is no one alive up there,” the captain said. “Thou,” he said to the sniper, “go up
there and see.”
The sniper looked down. He said nothing.
“Don’t you hear me?” the captain shouted at him.
“Yes, my captain,” the sniper said, not looking at him.
“Then get up and go.” The captain still had his pistol out. “Do you hear me?”
“Yes, my captain.”
“Why don’t you go, then?”
“I don’t want to, my captain.”
“You don’t want to?” The captain pushed the pistol against the small of the man’s
back. “You don’t want to?”
“I am afraid, my captain,” the soldier said with dignity.
Lieutenant Berrendo, watching the captain’s face and his odd eyes, thought he was
going to shoot the man then.
“Captain Mora,” he said.
“Lieutenant Berrendo?”
“It is possible the soldier is right.”
“That he is right to say he is afraid? That he is right to say he does not want to obey
an order?”
“No. That he is right that it is a trick.”
“They are all dead,” the captain said. “Don’t you hear me say they are all dead?’
“You mean our comrades on the slope?” Berrendo asked him. “I agree with you.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway171
“Paco,” the captain said, “don’t be a fool. Do you think you are the only one who cared
for Julián? I tell you the Reds are dead. Look!”
He stood up, then put both hands on top of the boulder and pulled himself up,
kneeing-up awkwardly, then getting on his feet.
“Shoot,” he shouted, standing on the gray granite boulder and waved both his arms.
“Shoot me! Kill me!”
On the hilltop El Sordo lay behind the dead horse and grinned.
What a people, he thought. He laughed, trying to hold it in because the shaking hurt
his arm.
“Reds,” came the shout from below. “Red canaille. Shoot me! Kill me!”
Sordo, his chest shaking, barely peeped past the horse’s crupper and saw the captain
on top of the boulder waving his arms. Another officer stood by the boulder. The sniper
was standing at the other side. Sordo kept his eye where it was and shook his head
happily.
“Shoot me,” he said softly to himself. “Kill me!” Then his shoulders shook again. The
laughing hurt his arm and each time he laughed his head felt as though it would burst.
But the laughter shook him again like a spasm.
Captain Mora got down from the boulder.
“Now do you believe me, Paco?” he questioned Lieutenant Berrendo.
“No,” said Lieutenant Berrendo.
“Cojones!” the captain said. “Here there is nothing but idiots and cowards.”
The sniper had gotten carefully behind the boulder again and Lieutenant Berrendo
was squatting beside him.
The captain, standing in the open beside the boulder, commenced to shout filth at the
hilltop. There is no language so filthy as Spanish. There are words for all the vile words
in English and there are other words and expressions that are used only in countries
where blasphemy keeps pace with the austerity of religion. Lieutenant Berrendo was a
very devout Catholic. So was the sniper. They were Carlists from Navarra and while
both of them cursed and blasphemed when they were angry they regarded it as a sin
which they regularly confessed.
As they crouched now behind the boulder watching the captain and listening to what
he was shouting, they both disassociated themselves from him and what he was saying.
They did not want to have that sort of talk on their consciences on a day in which they
might die. Talking thus will not bring luck, the sniper thought. Speaking thus of the
Virgen is bad luck. This one speaks worse than the Reds.
Julián is dead, Lieutenant Berrendo was thinking. Dead there on the slope on such a
day as this is. And this foul mouth stands there bringing more ill fortune with his
blasphemies.
Now the captain stopped shouting and turned to Lieutenant Berrendo. His eyes looked
stranger than ever.
“Paco,” he said, happily, “you and I will go up there.”
“Not me.”
“What?” The captain had his pistol out again.
I hate these pistol brandishers, Berrendo was thinking. They cannot give an order
without jerking a gun out. They probably pull out their pistols when they go to the toilet
and order the move they will make.
“I will go if you order me to. But under protest,” Lieutenant Berrendo told the captain.
“Then I will go alone,” the captain said. “The smell of cowardice is too strong here.”
Holding his pistol in his right hand, he strode steadily up the slope. Berrendo and the
sniper watched him. He was making no attempt to take any cover and he was looking
straight ahead of him at the rocks, the dead horse, and the fresh-dug dirt of the hilltop.
El Sordo lay behind the horse at the corner of the rock, watching the captain come
striding up the hill.
Only one, he thought. We get only one. But from his manner of speaking he is caza
mayor. Look at him walking. Look what an animal. Look at him stride forward. This one“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway172
is for me. This one I take with me on the trip. This one coming now makes the same
voyage I do. Come on, Comrade Voyager. Come striding. Come right along. Come
along to meet it. Come on. Keep on walking. Don’t slow up. Come right along. Come as
thou art coming. Don’t stop and look at those. That’s right. Don’t even look down. Keep
on coming with your eyes forward. Look, he has a moustache. What do you think of
that? He runs to a moustache, the Comrade Voyager. He is a captain. Look at his
sleeves. I said he was caza mayor. He has the face of an Inglés. Look. With a red face
and blond hair and blue eyes. With no cap on and his moustache is yellow. With blue
eyes. With pale blue eyes. With pale blue eyes with something wrong with them. With
pale blue eyes that don’t focus. Close enough. Too close. Yes, Comrade Voyager. Take
it, Comrade Voyager.
He squeezed the trigger of the automatic rifle gently and it pounded back three times
against his shoulder with the slippery jolt the recoil of a tripoded automatic weapon
gives.
The captain lay on his face on the hillside. His left arm was under him. His right arm
that had held the pistol was stretched forward of his head. From all down the slope they
were firing on the hill crest again.
Crouched behind the boulder, thinking that now he would have to sprint across that
open space under fire, Lieutenant Berrendo heard the deep hoarse voice of Sordo from
the hilltop.
“Bandidos!” the voice came. “Bandidos! Shoot me! Kill me!”
On the top of the hill El Sordo lay behind the automatic rifle laughing so that his chest
ached, so that he thought the top of his head would burst.
“Bandidos,” he shouted again happily. “Kill me, bandidos!” Then he shook his head
happily. We have lots of company for the Voyage, he thought.
He was going to try for the other officer with the automatic rifle when he would leave
the shelter of the boulder. Sooner or later he would have to leave it. Sordo knew that he
could never command from there and he thought he had a very good chance to get him.
Just then the others on the hill heard the first sound of the coming of the planes.
El Sordo did not hear them. He was covering the down-slope edge of the boulder with
his automatic rifle and he was thinking: when I see him he will be running already and I
will miss him if I am not careful. I could shoot behind him all across that stretch. I should
swing the gun with him and ahead of him. Or let him start and then get on him and
ahead of him. I will try to pick him up there at the edge of the rock and swing just ahead
of him. Then he felt a touch on his shoulder and he turned and saw the gray, fear-
drained face of Joaquín and he looked where the boy was pointing and saw the three
planes coming.
At this moment Lieutenant Berrendo broke from behind the boulder and, with his head
bent and his legs plunging, ran down and across the slope to the shelter of the rocks
where the automatic rifle was placed.
Watching the planes, Sordo never saw him go.
“Help me to pull this out,” he said to Joaquín and the boy dragged the automatic rifle
clear from between the horse and the rock.
The planes were coming on steadily. They were in echelon and each second they
grew larger and their noise was greater.
“Lie on your backs to fire at them,” Sordo said. “Fire ahead of them as they come.”
He was watching them all the time. “Cabrones!Hijos de puta!” he said rapidly.
“Ignacio!” he said. “Put the gun on the shoulder of the boy. Thou!” to Joaquín, “Sit
there and do not move. Crouch over. More. No. More.”
He lay back and sighted with the automatic rifle as the planes came on steadily.
“Thou, Ignacio, hold me the three legs of that tripod.” They were dangling down the
boy’s back and the muzzle of the gun was shaking from the jerking of his body that
Joaquín could not control as he crouched with bent head hearing the droning roar of
their coming.
Lying flat on his belly and looking up into the sky watching them come, Ignacio“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway173
gathered the legs of the tripod into his two hands and steadied the gun.
“Keep thy head down,” he said to Joaquín. “Keep thy head forward.”
“Pasionaria says ‘Better to die on thy—’ “ Joaquín was saying to himself as the drone
came nearer them. Then he shifted suddenly into “Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is
with thee; Blessed art thou among women and Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.
Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death. Amen.
Holy Mary, Mother of God,” he started, then he remembered quickly as the roar came
now unbearably and started an act of contrition racing in it, “Oh my God, I am heartily
sorry for having offended thee who art worthy of all my love—”
Then there were the hammering explosions past his ears and the gun barrel hot
against his shoulder. It was hammering now again and his ears were deafened by the
muzzle blast. Ignacio was pulling down hard on the tripod and the barrel was burning his
back. It was hammering now in the roar and he could not remember the act of contrition.
All he could remember was at the hour of our death. Amen. At the hour of our death.
Amen. At the hour. At the hour. Amen. The others all were firing. Now and at the hour of
our death. Amen.
Then, through the hammering of the gun, there was the whistle of the air splitting apart
and then in the red black roar the earth rolled under his knees and then waved up to hit
him in the face and then dirt and bits of rock were falling all over and Ignacio was lying
on him and the gun was lying on him. But he was not dead because the whistle came
again and the earth rolled under him with the roar. Then it came again and the earth
lurched under his belly and one side of the hilltop rose into the air and then fell slowly
over them where they lay.
The planes came back three times and bombed the hilltop but no one on the hilltop
knew it. Then the planes machine-gunned the hilltop and went away. As they dove on
the hill for the last time with their machine guns hammering, the first plane pulled up and
winged over and then each plane did the same and they moved from echelon to V-
formation and went away into the sky in the direction of Segovia.
Keeping a heavy fire on the hilltop, Lieutenant Berrendo pushed a patrol up to one of
the bomb craters from where they could throw grenades onto the crest. He was taking
no chances of any one being alive and waiting for them in the mess that was up there
and he threw four grenades into the confusion of dead horses, broken and split rocks,
and torn yellow-stained explosive-stinking earth before he climbed out of the bomb
crater and walked over to have a look.
No one was alive on the hilltop except the boy Joaquín, who was unconscious under
the dead body of Ignacio. Joaquín was bleeding from the nose and from the ears. He
had known nothing and had no feeling since he had suddenly been in the very heart of
the thunder and the breath had been wrenched from his body when the one bomb
struck so close and Lieutenant Berrendo made the sign of the cross and then shot him
in the back of the head, as quickly and as gently, if such an abrupt movement can be
gentle, as Sordo had shot the wounded horse.
Lieutenant Berrendo stood on the hilltop and looked down the slope at his own dead
and then across the country seeing where they had galloped before Sordo had turned at
bay here. He noticed all the dispositions that had been made of the troops and then he
ordered the dead men’s horses to be brought up and the bodies tied across the saddles
so that they might be packed in to La Granja.
“Take that one, too,” he said. “The one with his hands on the automatic rifle. That
should be Sordo. He is the oldest and it was he with the gun. No. Cut the head off and
wrap it in a poncho.” He considered a minute. “You might as well take all the heads. And
of the others below on the slope and where we first found them. Collect the rifles and
pistols and pack that gun on a horse.”
Then he walked down to where the lieutenant lay who had been killed in the first
assault. He looked down at him but did not touch him.
“Qué cosa más mala es la guerra,” he said to himself, which meant, “What a bad thing
war is.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway174
Then he made the sign of the cross again and as he walked down the hill he said five
Our Fathers and five Hail Marys for the repose of the soul of his dead comrade. He did
not wish to stay to see his orders being carried out.
28
After the planes went away Robert Jordan and Primitivo heard the firing start and his
heart seemed to start again with it. A cloud of smoke drifted over the last ridge that he
could see in the high country and the planes were three steadily receding specks in the
sky.
They’ve probably bombed hell out of their own cavalry and never touched Sordo and
Company, Robert Jordan said to himself. The damned planes scare you to death but
they don’t kill you.
“The combat goes on,” Primitivo said, listening to the heavy firing. He had winced at
each bomb thud and now he licked his dry lips.
“Why not?” Robert Jordan said. “Those things never kill anybody.”
Then the firing stopped absolutely and he did not hear another shot. Lieutenant
Berrendo’s pistol shot did not carry that far.
When the firing first stopped it did not affect him. Then as the quiet kept on a hollow
feeling came in his chest. Then he heard the grenades burst and for a moment his heart
rose. Then everything was quiet again and the quiet kept on and he knew that it was
over.
Maria came up from the camp with a tin bucket of stewed hare with mushrooms
sunken in the rich gravy and a sack with bread, a leather wine bottle, four tin plates, two
cups and four spoons. She stopped at the gun and ladled out two plates for Agustín and
Eladio, who had replaced Anselmo at the gun, and gave them bread and unscrewed the
horn tip of the wine bottle and poured two cups of wine.
Robert Jordan watched her climbing lithely up to his lookout post, the sack over her
shoulder, the bucket in one hand, her cropped head bright in the sun. He climbed down
and took the bucket and helped her up the last boulder.
“What did the aviation do?” she asked, her eyes frightened.
“Bombed Sordo.”
He had the bucket open and was ladling out stew onto a plate.
“Are they still fighting?”
“No. It is over.”
“Oh,” she said and bit her lip and looked out across the country.
“I have no appetite,” Primitivo said.
“Eat anyway,” Robert Jordan told him.
“I could not swallow food.”
“Take a drink of this, man,” Robert Jordan said and handed him the wine bottle. “Then
eat.”
“This of Sordo has taken away desire,” Primitivo said. “Eat, thou. I have no desire.”
Maria went over to him and put her arms around his neck and kissed him.
“Eat, old one,” she said. “Each one should take care of his strength.”
Primitivo turned away from her. He took the wine bottle and tipping his head back
swallowed steadily while he squirted a jet of wine into the back of his mouth. Then he
filled his plate from the bucket and commenced to eat.
Robert Jordan looked at Maria and shook his head. She sat down by him and put her
arm around his shoulder. Each knew how the other felt and they sat there and Robert
Jordan ate the stew, taking time to appreciate the mushrooms completely, and he drank
the wine and they said nothing.
“You may stay here, guapa, if you want,” he said after a while when the food was all
eaten.
“Nay,” she said. “I must go to Pilar.”
“It is all right to stay here. I do not think that anything will happen now.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway175
“Nay. I must go to Pilar. She is giving me instruction.”
“What does she give thee?”
“Instruction.” She smiled at him and then kissed him. “Did you never hear of religious
instruction?” She blushed. “It is something like that.” She blushed again. “But different.”
“Go to thy instruction,” he said and patted her on the head. She smiled at him again,
then said to Primitivo, “Do you want anything from below?”
“No, daughter,” he said. They both saw that he was still not yet recovered.
“Salud, old one,” she said to him.
“Listen,” Primitivo said. “I have no fear to die but to leave them alone thus—” his voice
broke.
“There was no choice,” Robert Jordan told him.
“I know. But all the same.”
“There was no choice,” Robert Jordan repeated. “And now it is better not to speak of
it.”
“Yes. But there alone with no aid from us—”
“Much better not to speak of it,” Robert Jordan said. “And thou, guapa, get thee to thy
instruction.”
He watched her climb down through the rocks. Then he sat there for a long time
thinking and watching the high country.
Primitivo spoke to him but he did not answer. It was hot in the sun but he did not
notice the heat while he sat watching the hill slopes and the long patches of pine trees
that stretched up the highest slope. An hour passed and the sun was far to his left now
when he saw them coming over the crest of the slope and he picked up his glasses.
The horses showed small and minute as the first two riders came into sight on the
long green slope of the high hill. Then there were four more horsemen coming down,
spread out across the wide hill and then through his glasses he saw the double column
of men and horses ride into the sharp clarity of his vision. As he watched them he felt
sweat come from his armpits and run down his flanks. One man rode at the head of the
column. Then came more horsemen. Then came the riderless horses with their burdens
tied across the saddles. Then there were two riders. Then came the wounded with men
walking by them as they rode. Then came more cavalry to close the column.
Robert Jordan watched them ride down the slope and out of sight into the timber. He
could not see at that distance the load one saddle bore of a long rolled poncho tied at
each end and at intervals so that it bulged between each lashing as a pod bulges with
peas. This was tied across the saddle and at each end it was lashed to the stirrup
leathers. Alongside this on the top of the saddle the automatic rifle Sordo had served
was lashed arrogantly.
Lieutenant Berrendo, who was riding at the head of the column, his flankers out, his
point pushed well forward, felt no arrogance. He felt only the hollowness that comes
after action. He was thinking: taking the heads is barbarous. But proof and identification
is necessary. I will have trouble enough about this as it is and who knows? This of the
heads may appeal to them. There are those of them who like such things. It is possible
they will send them all to Burgos. It is a barbarous business. The planes were muchos.
Much. Much. But we could have done it all, and almost without losses, with a Stokes
mortar. Two mules to carry the shells and a mule with a mortar on each side of the pack
saddle. What an army we would be then! With the fire power of all these automatic
weapons. And another mule. No, two mules to carry ammunition. Leave it alone, he told
himself. It is no longer cavalry. Leave it alone. You’re building yourself an army. Next
you will want a mountain gun.
Then he thought of Julián, dead on the hill, dead now, tied across a horse there in the
first troop, and as he rode down into the dark pine forest, leaving the sunlight behind him
on the hill, riding now in the quiet dark of the forest, he started to say a prayer for him
again.
“Hail, holy queen mother of mercy,” he started. “Our life, our sweetness and our hope.
To thee do we send up our sighs, mournings and weepings in this valley of tears—”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway176
He went on with the prayer the horses’ hooves soft on the fallen pine needles, the light
coming through the tree trunks in patches as it comes through the columns of a
cathedral, and as he prayed he looked ahead to see his flankers riding through the
trees.
He rode out of the forest onto the yellow road that led into La Granja and the horses’
hooves raised a dust that hung over them as they rode. It powdered the dead who were
tied face down across the saddles and the wounded, and those who walked beside
them, were in thick dust.
It was here that Anselmo saw them ride past in their dust.
He counted the dead and the wounded and he recognized Sordo’s automatic rifle. He
did not know what the poncho-wrapped bundle was which flapped against the led
horse’s flanks as the stirrup leathers swung but when, on his way home, he came in the
dark onto the hill where Sordo had fought, he knew at once what the long poncho roll
contained. In the dark he could not tell who had been up on the hill. But he counted
those that lay there and then made off across the hills for Pablo’s camp.
Walking alone in the dark, with a fear like a freezing of his heart from the feeling the
holes of the bomb craters had given him, from them and from what he had found on the
hill, he put all thought of the next day out of his mind. He simply walked as fast as he
could to bring the news. And as he walked he prayed for the souls of Sordo and of all
his band. It was the first time he had prayed since the start of the movement.
“Most kind, most sweet, most clement Virgin,” he prayed.
But he could not keep from thinking of the next day finally. So he thought: I will do
exactly as the Inglés says and as he says to do it. But let me be close to him, O Lord,
and may his instructions be exact for I do not think that I could control myself under the
bombardment of the planes. Help me, O Lord, tomorrow to comport myself as a man
should in his last hours. Help me, O Lord, to understand clearly the needs of the day.
Help me, O Lord, to dominate the movement of my legs that I should not run when the
bad moment comes. Help me, O Lord, to comport myself as a man tomorrow in the day
of battle. Since I have asked this aid of thee, please grant it, knowing I would not ask it if
it were not serious, and I will ask nothing more of thee again.
Walking in the dark alone he felt much better from having prayed and he was sure,
now, that he would comport himself well. Walking now down from the high country, he
went back to praying for the people of Sordo and in a short time he had reached the
upper post where Fernando challenged him.
“It is I,” he answered, “Anselmo.”
“Good,” Fernando said.
“You know of this of Sordo, old one?” Anselmo asked Fernando, the two of them
standing at the entrance of the big rocks in the dark.
“Why not?” Fernando said. “Pablo has told us.”
“He was up there?”
“Why not?” Fernando said stolidly. “He visited the hill as soon as the cavalry left.”
“He told you—”
“He told us all,” Fernando said. “What barbarians these fascists are! We must do away
with all such barbarians in Spain.” He stopped, then said bitterly, “In them is lacking all
conception of dignity.”
Anselmo grinned in the dark. An hour ago he could not have imagined that he would
ever smile again. What a marvel, that Fernando, he thought.
“Yes,” he said to Fernando. “We must teach them. We must take away their planes,
their automatic weapons, their tanks, their artillery and teach them dignity.”
“Exactly,” Fernando said. “I am glad that you agree.”
Anselmo left him standing there alone with his dignity and went on down to the cave.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway177
29
Anselmo found Robert Jordan sitting at the plank table inside the cave with Pablo
opposite him. They had a bowl poured full of wine between them and each had a cup of
wine on the table. Robert Jordan had his notebook out and he was holding a pencil.
Pilar and Maria were in the back of the cave out of sight. There was no way for Anselmo
to know that the woman was keeping the girl back there to keep her from hearing the
conversation and he thought that it was odd that Pilar was not at the table.
Robert Jordan looked up as Anselmo came in under the blanket that hung over the
opening. Pablo stared straight at the table. His eyes were focused on the wine bowl but
he was not seeing it.
“I come from above,” Anselmo said to Robert Jordan.
“Pablo has told us,” Robert Jordan said.
“There were six dead on the hill and they had taken the heads,” Anselmo said. “I was
there in the dark.”
Robert Jordan nodded. Pablo sat there looking at the wine bowl and saying nothing.
There was no expression on his face and his small pig-eyes were looking at the wine
bowl as though he had never seen one before.
“Sit down,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo.
The old man sat down at the table on one of the hide-covered stools and Robert
Jordan reached under the table and brought up the pinch-bottle of whiskey that had
been the gift of Sordo. It was about half-full. Robert Jordan reached down the table for a
cup and poured a drink of whiskey into it and shoved it along the table to Anselmo.
“Drink that, old one,” he said.
Pablo looked from the wine bowl to Anselmo’s face as he drank and then he looked
back at the wine bowl.
As Anselmo swallowed the whiskey he felt a burning in his nose, his eyes and his
mouth, and then a happy, comforting warmth in his stomach. He wiped his mouth with
the back of his hand.
Then he looked at Robert Jordan and said, “Can I have another?”
“Why not?” Robert Jordan said and poured another drink from the bottle and handed it
this time instead of pushing it.
This time there was not the burning when he swallowed but the warm comfort
doubled. It was as good a thing for his spirit as a saline injection is for a man who has
suffered a great hemorrhage.
The old man looked toward the bottle again.
“The rest is for tomorrow,” Robert Jordan said. “What passed on the road, old one?”
“There was much movement,” Anselmo said. “I have it all noted down as you showed
me. I have one watching for me and noting now. Later I will go for her report.”
“Did you see anti-tank guns? Those on rubber tires with the long barrels?”
“Yes,” Anselmo said. “There were four camions which passed on the road. In each of
them there was such a gun with pine branches spread across the barrels. In the trucks
rode six men with each gun.”
“Four guns, you say?” Robert Jordan asked him.
“Four,” Anselmo said. He did not look at his papers.
“Tell me what else went up the road.”
While Robert Jordan noted Anselmo told him everything he had seen move past him
on the road. He told it from the beginning and in order with the wonderful memory of
those who cannot read or write, and twice, while he was talking, Pablo reached out for
more wine from the bowl.
“There was also the cavalry which entered La Granja from the high country where El
Sordo fought,” Anselmo went on.
Then he told the number of the wounded he had seen and the number of the dead
across the saddles.
“There was a bundle packed across one saddle that I did not understand,” he said.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway178
“But now I know it was the heads.” He went on without pausing. “It was a squadron of
cavalry. They had only one officer left. He was not the one who was here in the early
morning when you were by the gun. He must have been one of the dead. Two of the
dead were officers by their sleeves. They were lashed face down over the saddles, their
arms hanging. Also they had the máquina of El Sordo tied to the saddle that bore the
heads. The barrel was bent. That is all,” he finished.
“It is enough,” Robert Jordan said and dipped his cup into the wine bowl. “Who beside
you has been through the lines to the side of the Republic?”
“Andrés and Eladio.”
“Which is the better of those two?”
“Andrés.”
“How long would it take him to get to Navacerrada from here?”
“Carrying no pack and taking his precautions, in three hours with luck. We came by a
longer, safer route because of the material.”
“He can surely make it?”
“No sé, there is no such thing as surely.”
“Not for thee either?”
“Nay.”
That decides that, Robert Jordan thought to himself. If he had said that he could make
it surely, surely I would have sent him.
“Andrés can get there as well as thee?”
“As well or better. He is younger.”
“But this must absolutely get there.”
“If nothing happens he will get there. If anything happens it could happen to any one.”
“I will write a dispatch and send it by him,” Robert Jordan said. “I will explain to him
where he can find the General. He will be at the Estado Mayor of the Division.”
“He will not understand all this of divisions and all,” Anselmo said. “Always has it
confused me. He should have the name of the General and where he can be found.”
“But it is at the Estado Mayor of the Division that he will be found.”
“But is that not a place?”
“Certainly it is a place, old one,” Robert Jordan explained patiently. “But it is a place
the General will have selected. It is where he will make his headquarters for the battle.”
“Where is it then?” Anselmo was tired and the tiredness was making him stupid. Also
words like Brigades, Divisions, Army Corps confused him. First there had been columns,
then there were regiments, then there were brigades. Now there were brigades and
divisions, both. He did not understand. A place was a place.
“Take it slowly, old one,” Robert Jordan said. He knew that if he could not make
Anselmo understand he could never explain it clearly to Andrés either. “The Estado
Mayor of the Division is a place the General will have picked to set up his organization
to command. He commands a division, which is two brigades. I do not know where it is
because I was not there when it was picked. It will probably be a cave or dugout, a
refuge, and wires will run to it. Andrés must ask for the General and for the Estado
Mayor of the Division. He must give this to the General or to the Chief of his Estado
Mayor or to another whose name I will write. One of them will surely be there even if the
others are out inspecting the preparations for the attack. Do you understand now?”
“Yes.”
“Then get Andrés and I will write it now and seal it with this seal.” He showed him the
small, round, wooden-backed rubber stamp with the seal of the S. I. M. and the round,
tin-covered inking pad no bigger than a fifty-cent piece he carried in his pocket. “That
seal they will honor. Get Andrés now and I will explain to him. He must go quickly but
first he must understand.”
“He will understand if I do. But you must make it very clear. This of staffs and divisions
is a mystery to me. Always have I gone to such things as definite places such as a
house. In Navacerrada it is in the old hotel where the place of command is. In
Guadarrama it is in a house with a garden.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway179
“With this General,” Robert Jordan said, “it will be some place very close to the lines. It
will be underground to protect from the planes. Andrés will find it easily by asking, if he
knows what to ask for. He will only need to show what I have written. But fetch him now
for this should get there quickly.”
Anselmo went out, ducking under the hanging blanket. Robert Jordan commenced
writing in his notebook.
“Listen, Inglés,” Pablo said, still looking at the wine bowl.
“I am writing,” Robert Jordan said without looking up.
“Listen, Inglés,” Pablo spoke directly to the wine bowl. “There is no need to be
disheartened in this. Without Sordo we have plenty of people to take the posts and blow
thy bridge.”
“Good,” Robert Jordan said without stopping writing.
“Plenty,” Pablo said. “I have admired thy judgment much today, Inglés,” Pablo told the
wine bowl. “I think thou hast much picardia. That thou art smarter than I am. I have
confidence in thee.”
Concentrating on his report to Golz, trying to put it in the fewest words and still make it
absolutely convincing, trying to put it so the attack would be cancelled, absolutely, yet
convince them he wasn’t trying to have it called off because of any fears he might have
about the danger of his own mission, but wished only to put them in possession of all
the facts, Robert Jordan was hardly half listening.
“Inglés,” Pablo said.
“I am writing,” Robert Jordan told him without looking up.
I probably should send two copies, he thought. But if I do we will not have enough
people to blow it if I have to blow it. What do I know about why this attack is made?
Maybe it is only a holding attack. Maybe they want to draw those troops from
somewhere else. Perhaps they make it to draw those planes from the North. Maybe that
is what it is about. Perhaps it is not expected to succeed. What do I know about it? This
is my report to Golz. I do not blow the bridge until the attack starts. My orders are clear
and if the attack is called off I blow nothing. But I’ve got to keep enough people here for
the bare minimum necessary to carry the orders out.
“What did you say?” he asked Pablo.
“That I have confidence, Inglés.” Pablo was still addressing the wine bowl.
Man, I wish I had, Robert Jordan thought. He went on writing.
30
So now everything had been done that there was to do that night. All orders had been
given. Every one knew exactly what he was to do in the morning. Andrés had been gone
three hours. Either it would come now with the coming of the daylight or it would not
come. I believe that it will come, Robert Jordan told himself, walking back down from the
upper post where he had gone to speak to Primitivo.
Golz makes the attack but he has not the power to cancel it. Permission to cancel it
will have to come from Madrid. The chances are they won’t be able to wake anybody up
there and if they do wake up they will be too sleepy to think. I should have gotten word
to Golz sooner of the preparations they have made to meet the attack, but how could I
send word about something until it happened? They did not move up that stuff until just
at dark. They did not want to have any movement on the road spotted by planes. But
what about all their planes? What about those fascist planes?
Surely our people must have been warned by them. But perhaps the fascists were
faking for another offensive down through Guadalajara with them. There were supposed
to be Italian troops concentrated in Soria, and at Siguenza again besides those
operating in the North. They haven’t enough troops or material to run two major
offensives at the same time though. That is impossible; so it must be just a bluff.
But we know how many troops the Italians have landed all last month and the month
before at Cádiz. It is always possible they will try again at Guadalajara, not stupidly as“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway180
before, but with three main fingers coming down to broaden it out and carry it along the
railway to the west of the plateau. There was a way that they could do it all right. Hans
had shown him. They made many mistakes the first time. The whole conception was
unsound. They had not used any of the same troops in the Arganda offensive against
the Madrid-Valencia road that they used at Guadalajara. Why had they not made those
same drives simultaneously? Why? Why? When would we know why?
Yet we had stopped them both times with the very same troops. We never could have
stopped them if they had pulled both drives at once. Don’t worry, he told himself. Look at
the miracles that have happened before this. Either you will have to blow that bridge in
the morning or you will not have to. But do not start deceiving yourself into thinking you
won’t have to blow it. You will blow it one day or you will blow it another. Or if it is not
this bridge it will be some other bridge. It is not you who decides what shall be done.
You follow orders. Follow them and do not try to think beyond them.
The orders on this are very clear. Too very clear. But you must not worry nor must you
be frightened. For if you allow yourself the luxury of normal fear that fear will infect those
who must work with you.
But that heads business was quite a thing all the same, he told himself. And the old
man running onto them on the hilltop alone. How would you have liked to run onto them
like that? That impressed you, didn’t it? Yes, that impressed you, Jordan. You have
been quite impressed more than once today. But you have behaved O.K. So far you
have behaved all right.
You do very well for an instructor in Spanish at the University of Montana, he joked at
himself. You do all right for that. But do not start to thinking that you are anything very
special. You haven’t gotten very far in this business. Just remember Durán, who never
had any military training and who was a composer and lad about town before the
movement and is now a damned good general commanding a brigade. It was all as
simple and easy to learn and understand to Durán as chess to a child chess prodigy.
You had read on and studied the art of war ever since you were a boy and your
grandfather had started you on the American Civil War. Except that Grandfather always
called it the War of the Rebellion. But compared with Durán you were like a good sound
chess player against a boy prodigy. Old Durán. It would be good to see Durán again. He
would see him at Gaylord’s after this was over. Yes. After this was over. See how well
he was behaving?
I’ll see him at Gaylord’s, he said to himself again, after this is over. Don’t kid yourself,
he said. You do it all perfectly O.K. Cold. Without kidding yourself. You aren’t going to
see Durán any more and it is of no importance. Don’t be that way either, he told himself.
Don’t go in for any of those luxuries.
Nor for heroic resignation either. We do not want any citizens full of heroic resignation
in these hills. Your grandfather fought four years in our Civil War and you are just
finishing your first year in this war. You have a long time to go yet and you are very well
fitted for the work. And now you have Maria, too. Why, you’ve got everything. You
shouldn’t worry. What is a little brush between a guerilla band and a squadron of
cavalry? That isn’t anything. What if they took the heads? Does that make any
difference? None at all.
The Indians always took the scalps when Grandfather was at Fort Kearny after the
war. Do you remember the cabinet in your father’s office with the arrowheads spread out
on a shelf, and the eagle feathers of the war bonnets that hung on the wall, their plumes
slanting, the smoked buckskin smell of the leggings and the shirts and the feel of the
beaded moccasins? Do you remember the great stave of the buffalo bow that leaned in
a corner of the cabinet and the two quivers of hunting and war arrows, and how the
bundle of shafts felt when you closed your hand around them?
Remember something like that. Remember something concrete and practical.
Remember Grandfather’s saber, bright and well oiled in its dented scabbard and
Grandfather showed you how the blade had been thinned from the many times it had
been to the grinder’s. Remember Grandfather’s Smith and Wesson. It was a single“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway181
action, officer’s model .32 caliber and there was no trigger guard. It had the softest,
sweetest trigger pull you had ever felt and it was always well oiled and the bore was
clean although the finish was all worn off and the brown metal of the barrel and the
cylinder was worn smooth from the leather of the holster. It was kept in the holster with a
U.S. on the flap in a drawer in the cabinet with its cleaning equipment and two hundred
rounds of cartridges. Their cardboard boxes were wrapped and tied neatly with waxed
twine.
You could take the pistol out of the drawer and hold it. “Handle it freely,” was
Grandfather’s expression. But you could not play with it because it was “a serious
weapon.”
You asked Grandfather once if he had ever killed any one with it and he said, “Yes.”
Then you said, “When, Grandfather?” and he said, “In the War of the Rebellion and
afterwards.”
You said, “Will you tell me about it, Grandfather?”
And he said, “I do not care to speak about it, Robert.”
Then after your father had shot himself with this pistol, and you had come home from
school and they’d had the funeral, the coroner had returned it after the inquest saying,
“Bob, I guess you might want to keep the gun. I’m supposed to hold it, but I know your
dad set a lot of store by it because his dad packed it all through the War, besides out
here when he first came out with the Cavalry, and it’s still a hell of a good gun. I had her
out trying her this afternoon. She don’t throw much of a slug but you can hit things with
her.”
He had put the gun back in the drawer in the cabinet where it belonged, but the next
day he took it out and he had ridden up to the top of the high country above Red Lodge,
with Chub, where they had built the road to Cooke City now over the pass and across
the Bear Tooth plateau, and up there where the wind was thin and there was snow all
summer on the hills they had stopped by the lake which was supposed to be eight
hundred feet deep and was a deep green color, and Chub held the two horses and he
climbed out on a rock and leaned over and saw his face in the still water, and saw
himself holding the gun, and then he dropped it, holding it by the muzzle, and saw it go
down making bubbles until it was just as big as a watch charm in that clear water, and
then it was out of sight. Then he came back off the rock and when he swung up into the
saddle he gave old Bess such a clout with the spurs she started to buck like an old
rocking horse. He bucked her out along the shore Qf the lake and as soon as she was
reasonable they went on back along the trail.
“I know why you did that with the old gun, Bob,” Chub said.
“Well, then we don’t have to talk about it,” he had said.
They never talked about it and that was the end of Grandfather’s side arms except for
the saber. He still had the saber in his trunk with the rest of his things at Missoula.
I wonder what Grandfather would think of this situation, he thought. Grandfather was a
hell of a good soldier, everybody said. They said if he had been with Custer that day he
never would have let him be sucked in that way. How could he ever not have seen the
smoke nor the dust of all those lodges down there in the draw along the Little Big Horn
unless there must have been a heavy morning mist? But there wasn’t any mist.
I wish Grandfather were here instead of me. Well, maybe we will all be together by
tomorrow night. If there should be any such damn fool business as a hereafter, and I’m
sure there isn’t, he thought, I would certainly like to talk to him. Because there are a lot
of things I would like to know. I have a right to ask him now because I have had to do
the same sort of things myself. I don’t think he’d mind my asking now. I had no right to
ask before. I understand him not telling me because he didn’t know me. But now I think
that we would get along all right. I’d like to be able to talk to him now and get his advice.
Hell, if I didn’t get advice I’d just like to talk to him. It’s a shame there is such a jump in
time between ones like us.
Then, as he thought, he realized that if there was any such thing as ever meeting,
both he and his grandfather would be acutely embarrassed by the presence of his“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway182
father. Any one has a right to do it, he thought. But it isn’t a good thing to do. I
understand it, but I do not approve of it. Lache was the word. But you do understand it?
Sure, I understand it but. Yes, but. You have to be awfully occupied with yourself to do a
thing like that.
Aw hell, I wish Grandfather was here, he thought. For about an hour anyway. Maybe
he sent me what little I have through that other one that misused the gun. Maybe that is
the only communication that we have. But, damn it. Truly damn it, but I wish the time-lag
wasn’t so long so that I could have learned from him what the other one never had to
teach me. But suppose the fear he had to go through and dominate and just get rid of
finally in four years of that and then in the Indian fighting, although in that, mostly, there
couldn’t have been so much fear, had made a cobarde out of the other one the way
second generation bullfighters almost always are? Suppose that? And maybe the good
juice only came through straight again after passing through that one?
I’ll never forget how sick it made me the first time I knew he was a cobarde. Go on,
say it in English. Coward. It’s easier when you have it said and there is never any point
in referring to a son of a bitch by some foreign term. He wasn’t any son of a bitch,
though. He was just a coward and that was the worst luck any man could have.
Because if he wasn’t a coward he would have stood up to that woman and not let her
bully him. I wonder what I would have been like if he had married a different woman?
That’s something you’ll never know, he thought, and grinned. Maybe the bully in her
helped to supply what was missing in the other. And you. Take it a little easy. Don’t get
to referring to the good juice and such other things until you are through tomorrow. Don’t
be snotty too soon. And then don’t be snotty at all. We’ll see what sort of juice you have
tomorrow.
But he started thinking about Grandfather again.
“George Custer was not an intelligent leader of cavalry, Robert,” his grandfather had
said. “He was not even an intelligent man.”
He remembered that when his grandfather said that he felt resentment that any one
should speak against that figure in the buckskin shirt, the yellow curls blowing, that
stood on that hill holding a service revolver as the Sioux closed in around him in the old
Anheuser-Busch lithograph that hung on the poolroom wall in Red Lodge.
“He just had great ability to get himself in and out of trouble,” his grandfather went on,
“and on the Little Big Horn he got into it but he couldn’t get out.
“Now Phil Sheridan was an intelligent man and so was Jeb Stuart. But John Mosby
was the finest cavalry leader that ever lived.”
He had a letter in his things in the trunk at Missoula from General Phil Sheridan to old
Killy-the-Horse Kilpatrick that said his grandfather was a finer leader of irregular cavalry
than John Mosby.
I ought to tell Golz about my grandfather, he thought. He wouldn’t ever have heard of
him though. He probably never even heard of John Mosby. The British all had heard of
them though because they had to study our Civil War much more than people did on the
Continent. Karkov said after this was over I could go to the Lenin Institute in Moscow if I
wanted to. He said I could go to the military academy of the Red Army if I wanted to do
that. I wonder what Grandfather would think of that? Grandfather, who never knowingly
sat at table with a Democrat in his life.
Well, I don’t want to be a soldier, he thought. I know that. So that’s out. I just want us
to win this war. I guess really good soldiers are really good at very little else, he thought.
That’s obviously untrue. Look at Napoleon and Wellington. You’re very stupid this
evening, he thought.
Usually his mind was very good company and tonight it had been when he thought
about his grandfather. Then thinking of his father had thrown him off. He understood his
father and he forgave him everything and he pitied him but he was ashamed of him.
You better not think at all, he told himself. Soon you will be with Maria and you won’t
have to think. That’s the best way now that everything is worked out. When you have
been concentrating so hard on something you can’t stop and your brain gets to racing“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway183
like a flywheel with the weight gone. You better just not think.
But just suppose, he thought. Just suppose that when the planes unload they smash
those anti-tank guns and just blow hell out of the positions and the old tanks roll good up
whatever hill it is for once and old Golz boots that bunch of drunks, clochards, bums,
fanatics and heroes that make up the Quatorzieme Brigade ahead of him, and I know
how good Durán’s people are in Golz’s other brigade, and we are in Segovia tomorrow
night.
Yes. Just suppose, he said to himself. I’ll settle for La Granja, he told himself. But you
are going to have to blow that bridge, he suddenly knew absolutely. There won’t be any
calling off. Because the way you have just been supposing there for a minute is how the
possibilities of that attack look to those who have ordered it. Yes, you will have to blow
the bridge, he knew truly. Whatever happens to Andrés doesn’t matter.
Coming down the trail there in the dark, alone with the good feeling that everything
that had to be done was over for the next four hours, and with the confidence that had
come from thinking back to concrete things, the knowledge that he would surely have to
blow the bridge came to him almost with comfort.
The uncertainty, the enlargement of the feeling of being uncertain, as when, through a
misunderstanding of possible dates, one does not know whether the guests are really
coming to a party, that had been with him ever since he had dispatched Andrés with the
report to Golz, had all dropped from him now. He was sure now that the festival would
not be cancelled. It’s much better to be sure, he thought. It’s always much better to be
sure.
31
So now they were in the robe again together and it was late in the last night. Maria lay
close against him and he felt the long smoothness of her thighs against his and her
breasts like two small hills that rise out of the long plain where there is a well, and the far
country beyond the hills was the valley of her throat where his lips were. He lay very
quiet and did not think and she stroked his head with her hand.
“Roberto,” Maria said very softly and kissed him. “I am ashamed. I do not wish to
disappoint thee but there is a great soreness and much pain. I do not think I would be
any good to thee.”
“There is always a great soreness and much pain,” he said. “Nay, rabbit. That is
nothing. We will do nothing that makes pain.”
“It is not that. It is that I am not good to receive thee as I wish to.”
“That is of no importance. That is a passing thing. We are together when we lie
together.”
“Yes, but I am ashamed. I think it was from when things were done to me that it
comes. Not from thee and me.”
“Let us not talk of that.”
“Nor do I wish to. I meant I could not bear to fail thee now on this night and so I sought
to excuse myself.”
“Listen, rabbit,” he said. “All such things pass and then there is no problem.” But he
thought; it was not good luck for the last night.
Then he was ashamed and said, “Lie close against me, rabbit. I love thee as much
feeling thee against me in here in the dark as I love thee making love.”
“I am deeply ashamed because I thought it might be again tonight as it was in the high
country when we came down from El Sordo’s.”
“Qué va,” he said to her. “That is not for every day. I like it thus as well as the other.”
He lied, putting aside disappointment. “We will be here together quietly and we will
sleep. Let us talk together. I know thee very little from talking.”
“Should we speak of tomorrow and of thy work? I would like to be intelligent about thy
work.”
“No,” he said and relaxed completely into the length of the robe and lay now quietly“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway184
with his cheek against her shoulder, his left arm under her head. “The most intelligent is
not to talk about tomorrow nor what happened today. In this we do not discuss the
losses and what we must do tomorrow we will do. Thou art not afraid?”
“Qué va,” she said. “I am always afraid. But now I am afraid for thee so much I do not
think of me.”
“Thou must not, rabbit. I have been in many things. And worse than this,” he lied.
Then suddenly surrendering to something, to the luxury of going into unreality, he
said, “Let us talk of Madrid and of us in Madrid.”
“Good,” she said. Then, “Oh, Roberto, I am sorry I have failed thee. Is there not some
other thing that I can do for thee?”
He stroked her head and kissed her and then lay close and relaxed beside her,
listening to the quiet of the night.
“Thou canst talk with me of Madrid,” he said and thought: I’ll keep any oversupply of
that for tomorrow. I’ll need all of that there is tomorrow. There are no pine needles that
need that now as I will need it tomorrow. Who was it cast his seed upon the ground in
the Bible? Onan. How did Onan turn out? he thought. I don’t remember ever hearing
any more about Onan. He smiled in the dark.
Then he surrendered again and let himself slip into it, feeling a voluptuousness of
surrender into unreality that was like a sexual acceptance of something that could come
in the night when there was no understanding, only the delight of acceptance.
“My beloved,” he said, and kissed her. “Listen. The other night I was thinking about
Madrid and I thought how I would get there and leave thee at the hotel while I went up to
see people at the hotel of the Russians. But that was false. I would not leave thee at any
hotel.”
“Why not?”
“Because I will take care of thee. I will not ever leave thee. I will go with thee to the
Seguridad to get papers. Then I will go with thee to buy those clothes that are needed.”
“They are few, and I can buy them.”
“Nay, they are many and we will go together and buy good ones and thou wilt be
beautiful in them.”
“I would rather we stayed in the room in the hotel and sent Out for the clothes. Where
is the hotel?”
“It is on the Plaza del Callao. We will be much in that room in that hotel. There is a
wide bed with clean sheets and there is hot running water in the bathtub and there are
two closets and I will keep my things in one and thou wilt take the other. And there are
tall, wide windows that open, and outside, in the streets, there is the spring. Also I know
good places to eat that are illegal but with good food, and I know shops where there is
still wine and whiskey. And we will keep things to eat in the room for when we are
hungry and also whiskey for when I wish a drink and I will buy thee manzanilla.”
“I would like to try the whiskey.”
“But since it is difficult to obtain and if thou likest manzanilla.”
“Keep thy whiskey, Roberto,” she said. “Oh, I love thee very much. Thou and thy
whiskey that I could not have. What a pig thou art.”
“Nay, you shall try it. But it is not good for a woman.”
“And I have only had things that were good for a woman,” Maria said. “Then there in
bed I will still wear my wedding shirt?”
“Nay. I will buy thee various nightgowns and pajamas too if you should prefer them.”
“I will buy seven wedding shirts,” she said. “One for each day of the week. And I will
buy a clean wedding shirt for thee. Dost ever wash thy shirt?”
“Sometimes.”
“I will keep everything clean and I will pour thy whiskey and put the water in it as it was
done at Sordo’s. I will obtain olives and salted codfish and hazel nuts for thee to eat
while thou drinkest and we will stay in the room for a month and never leave it. If I am fit
to receive thee,” she said, suddenly unhappy.
“That is nothing,” Robert Jordan told her. “Truly it is nothing. It is possible thou wert“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway185
hurt there once and now there is a scar that makes a further hurting. Such a thing is
possible. All such things pass. And also there are good doctors in Madrid if there is truly
anything.”
“But all was good before,” she said pleadingly.
“That is the promise that all will be good again.”
“Then let us talk again about Madrid.” She curled her legs between his and rubbed the
top of her head against his shoulder. “But will I not be so ugly there with this cropped
head that thou wilt be ashamed of me?”
“Nay. Thou art lovely. Thou hast a lovely face and a beautiful body, long and light, and
thy skin is smooth and the color of burnt gold and every one will try to take thee from
me.”
“Qué va, take me from thee,” she said. “No other man will ever touch me till I die. Take
me from thee! Qué va.”
“But many will try. Thou wilt see.”
“They will see I love thee so that they will know it would be as unsafe as putting their
hands into a caldron of melted lead to touch me. But thou? When thou seest beautiful
women of the same culture as thee? Thou wilt not be ashamed of me?”
“Never. And I will marry thee.”
“If you wish,” she said. “But since we no longer have the Church I do not think it
carries importance.”
“I would like us to be married.”
“If you wish. But listen. If we were ever in another country where there still was the
Church perhaps we could be married in it there.”
“In my country they still have the Church,” he told her. “There we can be married in it if
it means aught to thee. I have never been married. There is no problem.”
“I am glad thou hast never been married,” she said. “But I am glad thou knowest about
such things as you have told me for that means thou hast been with many women and
the Pilar told me that it is only such men who are possible for husbands. But thou wilt
not run with other women now? Because it would kill me.”
“I have never run with many women,” he said, truly. “Until thee I did not think that I
could love one deeply.”
She stroked his cheeks and then held her hands clasped behind his head. “Thou must
have known very many.”
“Not to love them.”
“Listen. The Pilar told me something—”
“Say it.”
“No. It is better not to. Let us talk again about Madrid.”
“What was it you were going to say?”
“I do not wish to say it.”
“Perhaps it would be better to say it if it could be important.”
“You think it is important?”
“Yes.”
“But how can you know when you do not know what it is?”
“From thy manner.”
“I will not keep it from you then. The Pilar told me that we would all die tomorrow and
that you know it as well as she does and that you give it no importance. She said this
not in criticism but in admiration.”
“She said that?” he said. The crazy bitch, he thought, and he said, “That is more of her
gypsy manure. That is the way old market women and café cowards talk. That is
manuring obscenity.” He felt the sweat that came from under his armpits and slid down
between his arm and his side and he said to himself, So you are scared, eh? and aloud
he said, “She is a manure-mouthed superstitious bitch. Let us talk again of Madrid.”
“Then you know no such thing?”
“Of course not. Do not talk such manure,” he said, using a stronger, ugly word.
But this time when he talked about Madrid there was no slipping into make-believe“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway186
again. Now he was just lying to his girl and to himself to pass the night before battle and
he knew it. He liked to do it, but all the luxury of the acceptance was gone. But he
started again.
“I have thought about thy hair,” he said. “And what we can do about it. You see it
grows now all over thy head the same length like the fur of an animal and it is lovely to
feel and I love it very much and it is beautiful and it flattens and rises like a wheatfield in
the wind when I pass my hand over it.”
“Pass thy hand over it.”
He did and left his hand there and went on talking to her throat, as he felt his own
throat swell. “But in Madrid I thought we could go together to the coiffeur’s and they
could cut it neatly on the sides and in the back as they cut mine and that way it would
look better in the town while it is growing out.”
“I would look like thee,” she said and held him close to her. “And then I never would
want to change it.”
“Nay. It will grow all the time and that will only be to keep it neat at the start while it is
growing long. How long will it take it to grow long?”
“Really long?”
“No. I mean to thy shoulders. It is thus I would have thee wear it.”
“As Garbo in the cinema?”
“Yes,” he said thickly.
Now the making believe was coming back in a great rush and he would take it all to
him. It had him now, and again he surrendered and went on. “So it will hang straight to
thy shoulders and curl at the ends as a wave of the sea curls, and it will be the color of
ripe wheat and thy face the color of burnt gold and thine eyes the only color they could
be with thy hair and thy skin, gold with the dark flecks in them, and I will push thy head
back and look in thy eyes and hold thee tight against me—”
“Where?”
“Anywhere. Wherever it is that we are. How long will it take for thy hair to grow?”
“I do not know because it never had been cut before. But I think in six months it should
be long enough to hang well below my ears and in a year as long as thou couldst ever
wish. But do you know what will happen first?”
“Tell me.”
“We will be in the big clean bed in thy famous room in our famous hotel and we will sit
in the famous bed together and look into the mirror of the armoire and there will be thee
and there will be me in the glass and then I will turn to thee thus, and put my arms
around thee thus, and then I will kiss thee thus.”
Then they lay quiet and close together in the night, hot-aching, rigid, close together
and holding her, Robert Jordan held closely too all those things that he knew could
never happen, and he went on with it deliberately and said, “Rabbit, we will not always
live in that hotel.”
“Why not?”
“We can get an apartment in Madrid on that street that runs along the Parque of the
Buen Retiro. I know an American woman who furnished apartments and rented them
before the movement and I know how to get such an apartment for only the rent that
was paid before the movement. There are apartments there that face on the park and
you can see all of the park from the windows; the iron fence, the gardens, and the gravel
walks and the green of the lawns where they touch the gravel, and the trees deep with
shadows and the many fountains, and now the chestnut trees will be in bloom. In Madrid
we can walk in the park and row on the lake if the water is back in it now.”
“Why would the water be out?”
“They drained it in November because it made a mark to sight from when the planes
came over for bombing. But I think that the water is back in it now. I am not sure. But
even if there is no water in it we can walk through all the park away from the lake and
there is a part that is like a forest with trees from all parts of the world with their names
on them, with placards that tell what trees they are and where they came from.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway187
“I would almost as soon go the cinema,” Maria said. “But the trees sound very
interesting and I will learn them all with thee if I can remember them.”
“They are not as in a museum,” Robert Jordan said. “They grow naturally and there
are hills in the park and part of the park is like a jungle. Then below it there is the book
fair where along the sidewalks there are hundreds of booths with second-hand books in
them and now, since the movement, there are many books, stolen in the looting of the
houses which have been bombed and from the houses of the fascists, and brought to
the book fair by those who stole them. I could spend all day every day at the stalls of the
book fair as I once did in the days before the movement, if I ever could have any time in
Madrid.”
“While thou art visiting the book fair I will occupy myself with the apartment,” Maria
said. “Will we have enough money for a servant?”
“Surely. I can get Petra who is at the hotel if she pleases thee. She cooks well and is
clean. I have eaten there with newspapermen that she cooks for. They have electric
stoves in their rooms.”
“If you wish her,” Maria said. “Or I can find some one. But wilt thou not be away much
with thy work? They would not let me go with thee on such work as this.”
“Perhaps I can get work in Madrid. I have done this work now for a long time and I
have fought since the start of the movement. It is possible that they would give me work
now in Madrid. I have never asked for it. I have always been at the front or in such work
as this.
“Do you know that until I met thee I have never asked for anything? Nor wanted
anything? Nor thought of anything except the movement and the winning of this war?
Truly I have been very pure in my ambitions. I have worked much and now I love thee
and,” he said it now in a complete embracing of all that would not be, “I love thee as I
love all that we have fought for. I love thee as I love liberty and dignity and the rights of
all men to work and not be hungry. I love thee as I love Madrid that we have defended
and as I love all my comrades that have died. And many have died. Many. Many. Thou
canst not think how many. But I love thee as I love what I love most in the world and I
love thee more. I love thee very much, rabbit. More than I can tell thee. But I say this
now to tell thee a little. I have never had a wife and now I have thee for a wife and I am
happy.”
“I will make thee as good a wife as I can,” Maria said. “Clearly I am not well trained but
I will try to make up for that. If we live in Madrid; good. If we must live in any other place;
good. If we live nowhere and I can go with thee; better. If we go to thy country I will learn
to talk Inglés like the most Inglés that there is. I will study all their manners and as they
do so will I do.”
“Thou wilt be very comic.”
“Surely. I will make mistakes but you will tell me and I will never make them twice, or
maybe only twice. Then in thy country if thou art lonesome for our food I can cook for
thee. And I will go to a school to learn to be a wife, if there is such a school, and study at
it.”
“There are such schools but thou dost not need that schooling.”
“Pilar told me that she thought they existed in your country. She had read of them in a
periodical. And she told me also that I must learn to speak Inglés and to speak it well so
thou wouldst never be ashamed of me.”
“When did she tell you this?”
“Today while we were packing. Constantly she talked to me about what I should do to
be thy wife.”
I guess she was going to Madrid too, Robert Jordan thought, and said, “What else did
she say?”
“She said I must take care of my body and guard the line of my figure as though I were
a bullfighter. She said this was of great importance.”
“It is,” Robert Jordan said. “But thou hast not to worry about that for many years.”
“No. She said those of our race must watch that always as it can come suddenly. She“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway188
told me she was once as slender as I but that in those days women did not take
exercise. She told me what exercises I should take and that I must not eat too much.
She told me which things not to eat. But I have forgotten and must ask her again.”
“Potatoes,” he said.
“Yes,” she went on. “It was potatoes and things that are fried. Also when I told her
about this of the soreness she said I must not tell thee but must support the pain and not
let thee know. But I told thee because I do not wish to lie to thee ever and also I feared
that thou might think we did not have the joy in common any longer and that other, as it
was in the high country, had not truly happened.”
“It was right to tell me.”
“Truly? For I am ashamed and I will do anything for thee that thou should wish. Pilar
has told me of things one can do for a husband.”
“There is no need to do anything. What we have we have together and we will keep it
and guard it. I love thee thus lying beside thee and touching thee and knowing thou art
truly there and when thou art ready again we will have all.”
“But hast thou not necessities that I can care for? She explained that to me.”
“Nay. We will have our necessities together. I have no necessities apart from thee.”
“That seems much better to me. But understand always that I will do what you wish.
But thou must tell me for I have great ignorance and much of what she told me I did not
understand clearly. For I was ashamed to ask and she is of such great and varied
wisdom.”
“Rabbit,” he said. “Thou art very wonderful.”
“Qué va,” she said. “But to try to learn all of that which goes into wifehood in a day
while we are breaking camp and packing for a battle with another battle passing in the
country above is a rare thing and if I make serious mistakes thou must tell me for I love
thee. It could be possible for me to remember things incorrectly and much that she told
me was very complicated.”
“What else did she tell thee?”
“Pues so many things I cannot remember them. She said I could tell thee of what was
done to me if I ever began to think of it again because thou art a good man and already
have understood it all. But that it were better never to speak of it unless it came on me
as a black thing as it had been before and then that telling it to thee might rid me of it.”
“Does it weigh on thee now?”
“No. It is as though it had never happened since we were first together. There is the
sorrow for my parents always. But that there will be always. But I would have thee know
that which you should know for thy own pride if I am to be thy wife. Never did I submit to
any one. Always I fought and always it took two of them or more to do me the harm.
One would sit on my head and hold me. I tell thee this for thy pride.”
“My pride is in thee. Do not tell it.”
“Nay, I speak of thy own pride which it is necessary to have in thy wife. And another
thing. My father was the mayor of the village and an honorable man. My mother was an
honorable woman and a good Catholic and they shot her with my father because of the
politics of my father who was a Republican. I saw both of them shot and my father said,
‘Viva la Republica,’ when they shot him standing against the wall of the slaughterhouse
of our village.
“My mother standing against the same wall said, ‘Viva my husband who was the
Mayor of this village,’ and I hoped they would shoot me too and I was going to say ‘Viva
la Republica y vivan mis padres,’ but instead there was no shooting but instead the
doing of the things.
“Listen. I will tell thee of one thing since it affects us. After the shooting at the
matadero they took us, those relatives who had seen it but were not shot, back from the
matadero up the steep hill into the main square of the town. Nearly all were weeping but
some were numb with what they had seen and the tears had dried in them. I myself
could not cry. I did not notice anything that passed for I could only see my father and my
mother at the moment of the shooting and my mother saying, ‘Long live my husband“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway189
who was Mayor of this village,’ and this was in my head like a scream that would not die
but kept on and on. For my mother was not a Republican and she would not say, ‘Viva
la Republica,’ but only Viva my father who lay there, on his face, by her feet.
“But what she had said, she had said very loud, like a shriek and then they shot and
she fell and I tried to leave the line to go to her but we were all tied. The shooting was
done by the guardia civil and they were still there waiting to shoot more when the
Falangists herded us away and up the hill leaving the guardias civiles leaning on their
rifles and leaving all the bodies there against the wall. We were tied by the wrists in a
long line of girls and women and they herded us up by the hill and through the streets to
the square and in the square they stopped in front of the barbershop which was across
the square from the city hail.
“Then the two men looked at us and one said, ‘That is the daughter of the Mayor,’ and
the other said, ‘Commence with her.’
“Then they cut the rope that was on each of my wrists, one saying to others of them,
‘Tie up the line,’ and these two took me by the arms and into the barbershop and lifted
me up and put me in the barber’s chair and held me there.
“I saw my face in the mirror of the barbershop and the faces of those who were
holding me and the faces of three others who were leaning over me and I knew none of
their faces but in the glass I saw myself and them, but they saw only me. And it was as
though one were in the dentist’s chair and there were many dentists and they were all
insane. My own face I could hardly recognize because my grief had changed it but I
looked at it and knew that it was me. But my grief was so great that I had no fear nor
any feeling but my grief.
“At that time I wore my hair in two braids and as I watched in the mirror one of them
lifted one of the braids and pulled on it so it hurt me suddenly through my grief and then
cut it off close to my head with a razor. And I saw myself with one braid and a slash
where the other had been. Then he cut off the other braid but without pulling on it and
the razor made a small cut on my ear and I saw blood come from it. Canst thou feel the
scar with thy finger?”
“Yes. But would it be better not to talk of this?”
“This is nothing. I will not talk of that which is bad. So he had cut both braids close to
my head with a razor and the others laughed and I did not even feel the cut on my ear
and then he stood in front of me and struck me across the face with the braids while the
other two held me and he said, ‘This is how we make Red nuns. This will show thee how
to unite with thy proletarian brothers. Bride of the Red Christ!’
“And he struck me again and again across the face with the braids which had been
mine and then he put the two of them in my mouth and tied them tight around my neck,
knotting them in the back to make a gag and the two holding me laughed.
“And all of them who saw it laughed and when I saw them laugh in the mirror I
commenced to cry because until then I had been too frozen in myself from the shooting
to be able to cry.
“Then the one who had gagged me ran a clippers all over my head; first from the
forehead all the way to the back of the neck and then across the top and then all over
my head and close behind my ears and they held me so I could see into the glass of the
barber’s mirror all the time that they did this and I could not believe it as I saw it done
and I cried and I cried but I could not look away from the horror that my face made with
the mouth open and the braids tied in it and my head coming naked under the clippers.
“And when the one with the clippers was finished he took a bottle of iodine from the
shelf of the barber (they had shot the barber too for he belonged to a syndicate, and he
lay in the doorway of the shop and they had lifted me over him as they brought me in)
and with the glass wand that is in the iodine bottle he touched me on the ear where it
had been cut and the small pain of that came through my grief and through my horror.
“Then he stood in front of me and wrote U. H. P. on my forehead with the iodine,
lettering it slowly and carefully as though he were an artist and I saw all of this as it
happened in the mirror and I no longer cried for my heart was frozen in me for my father“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway190
and my mother and what happened to me now was nothing and I knew it.
“Then when he had finished the lettering, the Falangist stepped back and looked at
me to examine his work and then he put down the iodine bottle and picked up the
clippers and said, ‘Next,’ and they took me out of the barbershop holding me tight by
each arm and I stumbled over the barber lying there still in the doorway on his back with
his gray face up, and we nearly collided with Concepción GracIa, my best friend, that
two of them were bringing in and when she saw me she did not recognize me, and then
she recognized me, and she screamed, and I could hear her screaming all the time they
were shoving me across the square, and into the doorway, and up the stairs of the city
hall and into the office of my father where they laid me onto the couch. And it was there
that the bad things were done.”
“My rabbit,” Robert Jordan said and held her as close and as gently as he could. But
he was as full of hate as any man could be. “Do not talk more about it. Do not tell me
any more for I cannot bear my hatred now.”
She was stiff and cold in his arms and she said, “Nay. I will never talk more of it. But
they are bad people and I would like to kill some of them with thee if I could. But I have
told thee this only for thy pride if I am to be thy wife. So thou wouldst understand.”
“I am glad you told me,” he said. “For tomorrow, with luck, we will kill plenty.”
“But will we kill Falangists? It was they who did it.”
“They do not fight,” he said gloomily. “They kill at the rear. It is not them we fight in
battle.”
“But can we not kill them in some way? I would like to kill some very much.”
“I have killed them,” he said. “And we will kill them again. At the trains we have killed
them.”
“I would like to go for a train with thee,” Maria said. “The time of the train that Pilar
brought me back from I was somewhat crazy. Did she tell thee how I was?”
“Yes. Do not talk of it.”
“I was dead in my head with a numbness and all I could do was cry. But there is
another thing that I must tell thee. This I must. Then perhaps thou wilt not marry me.
But, Roberto, if thou should not wish to marry me, can we not, then, just be always
together?”
“I will marry thee.”
“Nay. I had forgotten this. Perhaps you should not. It is possible that I can never bear
thee either a son or a daughter for the Pilar says that if I could it would have happened
to me with the things which were done. I must tell thee that. Oh, I do not know why I had
forgotten that.”
“It is of no importance, rabbit,” he said. “First it may not be true. That is for a doctor to
say. Then I would not wish to bring either a son or a daughter into this world as this
world is. And also you take all the love I have to give.”
“I would like to bear thy son and thy daughter,” she told him. “And how can the world
be made better if there are no children of us who fight against the fascists?”
“Thou,” he said. “I love thee. Hearest thou? And now we must sleep, rabbit. For I must
be up long before daylight and the dawn comes early in this month.”
“Then it is all right about the last thing I said? We can still be married?”
“We are married, now. I marry thee now. Thou art my wife. But go to sleep, my rabbit,
for there is little time now.”
“And we will truly be married? Not just a talking?”
“Truly.”
“Then I will sleep and think of that if I wake.”
“I, too.”
“Good night, my husband.”
“Good night,” he said. “Good night, wife.”
He heard her breathing steadily and regularly now and he knew she was asleep and
he lay awake and very still not wanting to waken her by moving. He thought of all the
part she had not told him and he lay there hating and he was pleased there would be“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway191
killing in the morning. But I must not take any of it personally, he thought.
Though how can I keep from it? I know that we did dreadful things to them too. But it
was because we were uneducated and knew no better. But they did that on purpose
and deliberately. Those who did that are the last flowering of what their education has
produced. Those are the flowers of Spanish chivalry. What a people they have been.
What sons of bitches from Cortez, Pizarro, Menéndez de Avila all down through Enrique
Lister to Pablo. And what wonderful people. There is no finer and no worse people in the
world. No kinder people and no crueler. And who understands them? Not me, because if
I did I would forgive it all. To understand is to forgive. That’s not true. Forgiveness has
been exaggerated. Forgiveness is a Christian idea and Spain has never been a
Christian country. It has always had its own special idol worship within the Church. Otra
Virgen más. I suppose that was why they had to destroy the virgins of their enemies.
Surely it was deeper with them, with the Spanish religion fanatics, than it was with the
people. The people had grown away from the Church because the Church was in the
government and the government had always been rotten. This was the only country that
the reformation never reached. They were paying for the Inquisition now, all right.
Well, it was something to think about. Something to keep your mind from worrying
about your work. It was sounder than pretending. God, he had done a lot of pretending
tonight. And Pilar had been pretending all day. Sure. What if they were killed tomorrow?
What did it matter as long as they did the bridge properly? That was all they had to do
tomorrow.
It didn’t. You couldn’t do these things indefinitely. But you weren’t supposed to live
forever. Maybe I have had all my life in three days, he thought. If that’s true I wish we
would have spent the last night differently. But last nights are never any good. Last
nothings are any good. Yes, last words were good sometimes. “Viva my husband who
was Mayor of this town” was good.
He knew it was good because it made a tingle run all over him when he said it to
himself. He leaned over and kissed Maria who did not wake. In English he whispered
very quietly, “I’d like to marry you, rabbit. I’m very proud of your family.”
32
On that same night in Madrid there were many people at the Hotel Gaylord. A car
pulled up under the porte-cochere of the hotel, its headlights painted over with blue
calcimine and a little man in black riding boots, gray riding breeches and a short, gray
high-buttoned jacket stepped out and returned the salute of the two sentries as he
opened the door, nodded to the secret policeman who sat at the concierge’s desk and
stepped into the elevator. There were two sentries seated on chairs inside the door, one
on each side of the marble entrance hall, and these only looked up as the little man
passed them at the door of the elevator. It was their business to feel every one they did
not know along the flanks, under the armpits, and over the hip pockets to see if the
person entering carried a pistol and, if he did, have him check it with the concierge. But
they knew the short man in riding boots very well and they hardly looked up as he
passed.
The apartment where he lived in Gaylord’s was crowded as he entered. People were
sitting and standing about and talking together as in any drawing room and the men and
the women were drinking vodka, whiskey and soda, and beer from small glasses filled
from great pitchers. Four of the men were in uniform. The others wore windbreakers or
leather jackets.and three of the four women were dressed in ordinary street dresses
while the fourth, who was haggardly thin and dark, wore a sort of severely cut
militiawoman’s uniform with a skirt with high boots under it.
When he came into the room, Karkov went at once to the woman in the uniform and
bowed to her and shook hands. She was his wife and he said something to her in
Russian that no one could hear and for a moment the insolence that had been in his
eyes as he entered the room was gone. Then it lighted again as he saw the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway192
mahoganycolored head and the love-lazy face of the well-constructed girl who was his
mistress and he strode with short, precise steps over to her and bowed and shook her
hand in such a way that no one could tell it was not a mimicry of his greeting to his wife.
His wife had not looked after him as he walked across the room. She was standing with
a tall, good-looking Spanish officer and they were talking Russian now.
“Your great love is getting a little fat,” Karkov was saying to the girl. “All of our heroes
are fattening now as we approach the second year.” He did not look at the man he was
speaking of.
“You are so ugly you would be jealous of a toad,” the girl told him cheerfully. She
spoke in German. “Can I go with thee to the offensive tomorrow?”
“No. Nor is there one.”
“Every one knows about it,” the girl said. “Don’t be so mysterious. Dolores is going. I
will go with her or Carmen. Many people are going.”
“Go with whoever will take you,” Karkov said. “I will not.”
Then he turned to the girl and asked seriously, “Who told thee of it? Be exact.”
“Richard,” she said as seriously.
Karkov shrugged his shoulders and left her standing.
“Karkov,” a man of middle height with a gray, heavy, sagging face, puffed eye
pouches and a pendulous under-lip called to him in a dyspeptic voice. “Have you heard
the good news?”
Karkov went over to him and the man said, “I only have it now. Not ten minutes ago. It
is wonderful. All day the fascists have been fighting among themselves near Segovia.
They have been forced to quell the mutinies with automatic rifle and machine-gun fire. In
the afternoon they were bombing their own troops with planes.”
“Yes?” asked Karkov.
“That is true,” the puffy-eyed man said. “Dolores brought the news herself. She was
here with the news and was in such a state of radiant exultation as I have never seen.
The truth of the news shone from her face. That great face—” he said happily.
“That great face,” Karkov said with no tone in his voice at all.
“If you could have heard her,” the puffy-eyed man said. “The news itself shone from
her with a light that was not of this world. In her voice you could tell the truth of what she
said. I am putting it in an article for Izvestia. It was one of the greatest moments of the
war to me when I heard the report in that great voice where pity, compassion and truth
are blended. Goodness and truth shine from her as from a true saint of the people. Not
for nothing is she called La Pasionaria.”
“Not for nothing,” Karkov said in a dull voice. “You better write it for Izvestia now,
before you forget that last beautiful lead.”
“That is a woman that is not to joke about. Not even by a cynic like you,” the puffy-
eyed man said. “If you could have been here to hear her and to see her face.”
“That great voice,” Karkov said. “That great face. Write it,” he said. “Don’t tell it to me.
Don’t waste whole paragraphs on me. Go and write it now.”
“Not just now.”
“I think you’d better,” Karkov said and looked at him, and then looked away. The puffy-
eyed man stood there a couple of minutes more holding his glass of vodka, his eyes,
puffy as they were, absorbed in the beauty of what he had seen and heard and then he
left the room to write it.
Karkov went over to another man of about forty-eight, who was short, chunky, jovial-
looking with pale blue eyes, thinning blond hair and a gay mouth under a bristly yellow
moustache. This man was in uniform. He was a divisional commander and he was a
Hungarian.
“Were you here when the Dolores was here?” Karkov asked the man.
“Yes.”
“What was the stuff?”
“Something about the fascists fighting among themselves. Beautiful if true.”
“You hear much talk of tomorrow.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway193
“Scandalous. All the journalists should be shot as well as most of the people in this
room and certainly the intriguing German unmentionable of a Richard. Whoever gave
that Sunday fuggler command of a brigade should be shot. Perhaps you and me should
be shot too. It is possible,” the General laughed. “Don’t suggest it though.”
“That is a thing I never like to talk about,” Karkov said. “That American who comes
here sometimes is over there. You know the one, Jordan, who is with the partizan
group. He is there where this business they spoke of is supposed to happen.”
“Well, he should have a report through on it tonight then,” the General said. “They
don’t like me down there or I’d go down and find out for you. He works with Golz on this,
doesn’t he? You’ll see Golz tomorrow.”
“Early tomorrow.”
“Keep out of his way until it’s going well,” the General said. “He hates you bastards as
much as I do. Though he has a much better temper.”
“But about this—”
“It was probably the fascists having manoeuvres,” the General grinned. “Well, we’ll
see if Golz can manceuvre them a little. Let Golz try his hand at it. We manoeuvred
them at Guadalajara.”
“I hear you are travelling too,” Karkov said, showing his bad teeth as he smiled. The
General was suddenly angry.
“And me too. Now is the mouth on me. And on all of us always. This filthy sewing
circle of gossip. One man who could keep his mouth shut could save the country if he
believed he could.”
“Your friend Prieto can keep his mouth shut.”
“But he doesn’t believe he can win. How can you win without belief in the people?”
“You decide that,” Karkov said. “I am going to get a little sleep.”
He left the smoky, gossip-filled room and went into the back bedroom and sat down on
the bed and pulled his boots off. He could still hear them talking so he shut the door and
opened the window. He did not bother to undress because at two o’clock he would be
starting for the drive by Colmenar, Cerceda, and Navacerrada up to the front where
Golz would be attacking in the morning.
33
It was two o’clock in the morning when Pilar waked him. As her hand touched him he
thought, at first, it was Maria and he rolled toward her and said, “Rabbit.” Then the
woman’s big hand shook his shoulder and he was suddenly, completely and absolutely
awake and his hand was around the butt of the pistol that lay alongside of his bare right
leg and all of him was as cocked as the pistol with its safety catch slipped off.
In the dark he saw it was Pilar and he looked at the dial of his wrist watch with the two
hands shining in the short angle close to the top and seeing it was only two, he said,
“What passes with thee, woman?”
“Pablo is gone,” the big woman said to him.
Robert Jordan put on his trousers and shoes. Maria had not waked.
“When?” he asked.
“It must be an hour.”
“And?”
“He has taken something of thine,” the woman said miserably.
“So. What?”
“I do not know,” she told him. “Come and see.”
In the dark they walked over to the entrance of the cave, ducked under the blanket
and went in. Robert Jordan followed her in the dead-ashes, bad-air and sleeping-men
smell of the cave, shining his electric torch so that he would not step on any of those
who were sleeping on the floor. Anselmo woke and said, “Is it time?”
“No,” Robert Jordan whispered. “Sleep, old one.”
The two sacks were at the head of Pilar’s bed which was screened off with a hanging“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway194
blanket from the rest of the cave. The bed smelt stale and sweat-dried and sickly-sweet
the way an Indian’s bed does as Robert Jordan knelt on it and shone the torch on the
two sacks. There was a long slit from top to bottom in each one. Holding the torch in his
left hand, Robert Jordan felt in the first sack with his right hand. This was the one that he
carried his robe in and it should not be very full. It was not very full. There was some
wire in it still but the square wooden box of the exploder was gone. So was the cigar box
with the carefully wrapped and packed detonators. So was the screw-top tin with the
fuse and the caps.
Robert Jordan felt in the other sack. It was still full of explosive. There might be one
packet missing.
He stood up and turned to the woman. There is a hollow empty feeling that a man can
have when he is waked too early in the morning that is almost like the feeling of disaster
and he had this multiplied a thousand times.
“And this is what you call guarding one’s materials,” he said.
“I slept with my head against them and one arm touching them,” Pilar told him.
“You slept well.”
“Listen,” the woman said. “He got up in the night and I said, ‘Where do you go, Pablo?’
‘To urinate, woman,’ he told me and I slept again. When I woke again I did not know
what time had passed but I thought, when he was not there, that he had gone down to
look at the horses as was his custom. Then,” she finished miserably, “when he did not
come I worried and when I worried I felt of the sacks to be sure all was well and there
were the slit places and I came to thee.”
“Come on,” Robert Jordan said.
They were outside now and it was still so near the middle of the night that you could
not feel the morning coming.
“Can he get out with the horses other ways than by the sentry?”
“Two ways.”
“Who’s at the top?”
“Eladio.”
Robert Jordan said nothing more until they reached the meadow where the horses
were staked out to feed. There were three horses feeding in the meadow. The big bay
and the gray were gone.
“How long ago do you think it was he left you?”
“It must have been an hour.”
“Then that is that,” Robert Jordan said. “I go to get what is left of my sacks and go
back to bed.”
“I will guard them.”
“Qué va, you will guard them. You’ve guarded them once already.”
“Inglés,” the woman said, “I feel in regard to this as you do. There is nothing I would
not do to bring back thy property. You have no need to hurt me. We have both been
betrayed by Pablo.”
As she said this Robert Jordan realized that he could not afford the luxury of being
bitter, that he could not quarrel with this woman. He had to work with this woman on that
day that was already two hours and more gone.
He put his hand on her shoulder. “It is nothing, Pilar,” he told her. “What is gone is of
small importance. We shall improvise something that will do as well.”
“But what did he take?”
“Nothing, woman. Some luxuries that one permits oneself.”
“Was it part of thy mechanism for the exploding?”
“Yes. But there are other ways to do the exploding. Tell me, did Pablo not have caps
and fuse? Surely they would have equipped him with those?”
“He has taken them,” she said miserably. “I looked at once for them. They are gone,
too.”
They walked back through the woods to the entrance of the cave.
“Get some sleep,” he said. “We are better off with Pablo gone.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway195
“I go to see Eladio.”
“He will have gone another way.”
“I go anyway. I have betrayed thee with my lack of smartness.”
“Nay,” he said. “Get some sleep, woman. We must be under way at four.”
He went into the cave with her and brought out the two sacks, carrying them held
together in both arms so that nothing could spill from the slits.
“Let me sew them up.”
“Before we start,” he said softly. “I take them not against you but so that I can sleep.”
“I must have them early to sew them.”
“You shall have them early,” he told her. “Get some sleep, woman.”
“Nay,” she said. “I have failed thee and I have failed the Republic.”
“Get thee some sleep, woman,” he told her gently. “Get thee some sleep.”
34
The fascists held the crests of the hills here. Then there was a valley that no one held
except for a fascist post in a farmhouse with its outbuildings and its barn that they had
fortified. Andrés, on his way to Golz with the message from Robert Jordan, made a wide
circle around this post in the dark. He knew where there was a trip wire laid that fired a
set-gun and he located it in the dark, stepped over it, and started along the small stream
bordered with poplars whose leaves were moving with the night wind. A cock crowed at
the farmhouse that was the fascist post and as he walked along the stream he looked
back and saw, through the trunks of the poplars, a light showing at the lower edge of
one of the windows of the farmhouse. The night was quiet and clear and Andrés left the
stream and struck across the meadow.
There were four haycocks in the meadow that had stood there ever since the fighting
in July of the year before. No one had ever carried the hay away and the four seasons
that had passed had flattened the cocks and made the hay worthless.
Andrés thought what a waste it was as he stepped over a trip wire that ran between
two of the haycocks. But the Republicans would have had to carry the hay up the steep
Guadarrama slope that rose beyond the meadow and the fascists did not need it, I
suppose, he thought.
They have all the hay they need and all the grain. They have much, he thought. But
we will give them a blow tomorrow morning. Tomorrow morning we will give them
something for Sordo. What barbarians they are! But in the morning there will be dust on
the road.
He wanted to get this message-taking over and be back for the attack on the posts in
the morning. Did he really want to get back though or did he only pretend he wanted to
be back? He knew the reprieved feeling he had felt when the Inglés had told him he was
to go with the message. He had faced the prospect of the morning calmly. It was what
was to be done. He had voted for it and would do it. The wiping out of Sordo had
impressed him deeply. But, after all, that was Sordo. That was not them. What they had
to do they would do.
But when the Inglés had spoken to him of the message he had felt the way he used to
feel when he was a boy and he had wakened in the morning of the festival of his village
and heard it raining hard so that he knew that it would be too wet and that the bullbaiting
in the square would be cancelled.
He loved the bullbaiting when he was a boy and he looked forward to it and to the
moment when he would be in the square in the hot sun and the dust with the carts
ranged all around to close the exits and to make a closed place into which the bull would
come, sliding down out of his box, braking with all four feet, when they pulled the end-
gate up. He looked forward with excitement, delight and sweating fear to the moment
when, in the square, he would hear the clatter of the bull’s horns knocking against the
wood of his travelling box, and then the sight of him as he came, sliding, braking out into
the square, his head up, his nostrils wide, his ears twitching, dust in the sheen of his“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway196
black hide, dried crut splashed on his flanks, watching his eyes set wide apart,
unblinking eyes under the widespread horns as smooth and solid as driftwood polished
by the sand, the sharp tips uptilted so that to see them did something to your heart.
He looked forward all the year to that moment when the bull would come out into the
square on that day when you watched his eyes while he made his choice of whom in the
square he would attack in that sudden head-lowering, horn-reaching, quick catgallop
that stopped your heart dead when it started. He had looked forward to that moment all
the year when he was a boy; but the feeling when the Inglés gave the order about the
message was the same as when you woke to hear the reprieve of the rain falling on the
slate roof, against the stone wall and into the puddles on the dirt Street of the village.
He had always been very brave with the bull in those village capeas, as brave as any
in the village or of the other near-by villages, and not for anything would he have missed
it any year although he did not go to the capeas of other villages. He was able to wait
still when the bull charged and only jumped aside at the last moment. He waved a sack
under his muzzle to draw him off when the bull had some one down and many times he
had held and pulled on the horns when the bull had some one on the ground and pulled
sideways on the horn, had slapped and kicked him in the face until he left the man to
charge some one else.
He had held the bull’s tail to pull him away from a fallen man, bracing hard and pulling
and twisting. Once he had pulled the tail around with one hand until he could reach a
horn with the other and when the bull had lifted his head to charge him he had run
backwards, circling with the bull, holding the tail in one hand and the horn in the other
until the crowd had swarmed onto the bull with their knives and stabbed him. In the dust
and the heat, the shouting, the bull and man and wine smell, he had been in the first of
the crowd that threw themselves onto the bull and he knew the feeling when the bull
rocked and bucked under him and he lay across the withers with one arm locked around
the base of the horn and his hand holding the other horn tight, his fingers locked as his
body tossed and wrenched and his left arm felt as though it would tear from the socket
while he lay on the hot, dusty, bristly, tossing slope of muscle, the ear clenched tight in
his teeth, and drove his knife again and again and again into the swelling, tossing bulge
of the neck that was now spouting hot on his fist as he let his weight hang on the high
slope of the withers and banged and banged into the neck.
The first time he had bit the ear like that and held onto it, his neck and jaws stiffened
against the tossing, they had all made fun of him afterwards. But though they joked him
about it they had great respect for him. And every year after that he had to repeat it.
They called him the bulldog of Villaconejos and joked about him eating cattle raw. But
every one in the village looked forward to seeing him do it and every year he knew that
first the bull would come out, then there would be the charges and the tossing, and then
when they yelled for the rush for the killing he would place himself to rush through the
other attackers and leap for his hold. Then, when it was over, and the bull settled and
sunk dead finally under the weight of the killers, he would stand up and walk away
ashamed of the ear part, but also as proud as a man could be. And he would go through
the carts to wash his hands at the stone fountain and men would clap him on the back
and hand him wineskins and say, “Hurray for you, Bulldog. Long life to your mother.”
Or they would say, “That’s what it is to have a pair of cojones! Year after year!”
Andrés would be ashamed, empty-feeling, proud and happy, and he would shake
them all off and wash his hands and his right arm and wash his knife well and then take
one of the wineskins and rinse the ear-taste out of his mouth for that year; spitting the
wine on the stone flags of the plaza before he lifted the wineskin high and let the wine
spurt into the back of his mouth.
Surely. He was the Bulldog of Villaconejos and not for anything would he have missed
doing it each year in his village. But he knew there was no better feeling than that one
the sound of the rain gave when he knew he would not have to do it.
But I must go back, he told himself. There is no question but that I must go back for
the affair of the posts and the bridge. My brother Eladio is there, who is of my own bone“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway197
and flesh. Anselmo, Primitivo, Fernando, Agustín, Rafael, though clearly he is not
serious, the two women, Pablo and the Inglés, though the Inglés does not count since
he is a foreigner and under orders. They are all in for it. It is impossible that I should
escape this proving through the accident of a message. I must deliver this message now
quickly and well and then make all haste to return in time for the assault on the posts. It
would be ignoble of me not to participate in this action because of the accident of this
message. That could not be clearer. And besides, he told himself, as one who suddenly
remembers that there will be pleasure too in an engagement only the onerous aspects
of which he has been considering, and besides I will enjoy the killing of some fascists. It
has been too long since we have destroyed any. Tomorrow can be a day of much valid
action. Tomorrow can be a day of concrete acts. Tomorrow can be a day which is worth
something. That tomorrow should come and that I should be there.
Just then, as knee deep in the gorse he climbed the steep slope that led to the
Republican lines, a partridge flew up from under his feet, exploding in a whirr of
wingbeats in the dark and he felt a sudden breath-stopping fright. It is the suddenness,
he thought. How can they move their wings that fast? She must be nesting now. I
probably trod close to the eggs. If there were not this war I would tie a handkerchief to
the bush and come back in the daytime and search out the nest and I could take the
eggs and put them under a setting hen and when they hatched we would have little
partridges in the poultry yard and I would watch them grow and, when they were grown,
I’d use them for callers. I wouldn’t blind them because they would be tame. Or do you
suppose they would fly off? Probably. Then I would have to blind them.
But I don’t like to do that after I have raised them. I could clip the wings or tether them
by one leg when I used them for calling. If there was no war I would go with Eladio to get
crayfish from that stream back there by the fascist post. One time we got four dozen
from that stream in a day. If we go to the Sierra de Gredos after this of the bridge there
are fine streams there for trout and for crayfish also. I hope we go to Gredos, he
thought. We could make a good life in Gredos in the summer time and in the fall but it
would be terribly cold in winter. But by winter maybe we will have won the war.
If our father had not been a Republican both Eladio and I would be soldiers now with
the fascists and if one were a soldier with them then there would be no problem. One
would obey orders and one would live or die and in the end it would be however it would
be. It was easier to live under a regime than to fight it.
But this irregular fighting was a thing of much responsibility. There was much worry if
you were one to worry. Eladio thinks more than I do. Also he worries. I believe truly in
the cause and I do not worry. But it is a life of much responsibility.
I think that we are born into a time of great difficulty, he thought. I think any other time
was probably easier. One suffers little because all of us have been formed to resist
suffering. They who suffer are unsuited to this climate. But it is a time of difficult
decisions. The fascists attacked and made our decision for us. We fight to live. But I
would like to have it so that I could tie a handkerchief to that bush back there and come
in the daylight and take the eggs and put them under a hen and be able to see the
chicks of the partridge in my own courtyard. I would like such small and regular things.
But you have no house and no courtyard in your no-house, he thought. You have no
family but a brother who goes to battle tomorrow and you own nothing but the wind and
the sun and an empty belly. The wind is small, he thought, and there is no sun. You
have four grenades in your pocket but they are only good to throw away. You have a
carbine on your back but it is only good to give away bullets. You have a message to
give away. And you’re full of crap that you can give to the earth, he grinned in the dark.
You can anoint it also with urine. Everything you have is to give. Thou art a
phenomenon of philosophy and an unfortunate man, he told himself and grinned again.
But for all his noble thinking a little while before there was in him that reprieved feeling
that had always come with the sound of rain in the village on the morning of the fiesta.
Ahead of him now at the top of the ridge was the government position where he knew
he would be challenged.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway198
35
Robert Jordan lay in the robe beside the girl Maria who was still sleeping. He lay on
his side turned away from the girl and he felt her long body against his back and the
touch of it now was just an irony. You, you, he raged at himself. Yes, you. You told
yourself the first time you saw him that when he would be friendly would be when the
treachery would come. You damned fool. You utter blasted damned fool. Chuck all that.
That’s not what you have to do now.
What are the chances that he hid them or threw them away? Not so good. Besides
you’d never find them in the dark. He would have kept them. He took some dynamite,
too. Oh, the dirty, vile, treacherous sod. The dirty rotten crut. Why couldn’t he have just
mucked off and not have taken the exploder and the detonators? Why was I such an
utter goddamned fool as to leave them with that bloody woman? The smart, treacherous
ugly bastard. The dirty cabrón.
Cut it out and take it easy, he told himself. You had to take chances and that was the
best there was. You’re just mucked, he told himself. You’re mucked for good and higher
than a kite. Keep your damned head and get the anger out and stop this cheap
lamenting like a damned wailing wall. It’s gone. God damn you, it’s gone. Oh damn the
dirty swine to hell. You can muck your way out of it. You’ve got to, you know you’ve got
to blow it if you have to stand there and—cut Out that stuff, too. Why don’t you ask your
grandfather?
Oh, muck my grandfather and muck this whole treacherous muckfaced mucking
country and every mucking Spaniard in it on either side and to hell forever. Muck them
to hell together, Largo, Prieto, Asensio, Miaja, Rojo, all of them. Muck every one of them
to death to hell. Muck the whole treachery-ridden country. Muck their egotism and their
selfishness and their selfishness and their egotism and their conceit and their treachery.
Muck them to hell and always. Muck them before we die for them. Muck them after we
die for them. Muck them to death and hell. God muck Pablo. Pablo is all of them. God
pity the Spanish people. Any leader they have will muck them. One good man, Pablo
Iglesias, in two thousand years and everybody else mucking them. How do we know
how he would have stood up in this war? I remember when I thought Largo was O.K.
Durruti was good and his own people shot him there at the Puente de los Franceses.
Shot him because he wanted them to attack. Shot him in the glorious discipline of
indiscipline. The cowardly swine. Oh muck them all to hell and be damned. And that
Pablo that just mucked off with my exploder and my box of detonators. Oh muck him to
deepest hell. But no. He’s mucked us instead. They always muck you instead, from
Cortez and Menendez de Avila down to Miaja. Look at what Miaja did to Kleber. The
bald egotistical swine. The stupid egg-headed bastard. Muck all the insane, egotistical,
treacherous swine that have always governed Spain and ruled her armies. Muck
everybody but the people and then be damned careful what they turn into when they
have power.
His rage began to thin as he exaggerated more and more and spread his scorn and
contempt so widely and unjustly that he could no longer believe in it himself. If that were
true what are you here for? It’s not true and you know it. Look at all the good ones. Look
at all the fine ones. He could not bear to be unjust. He hated injustice as he hated
cruelty and he lay in his rage that blinded his mind until gradually the anger died down
and the red, black, blinding, killing anger was all gone and his mind now as quiet,
empty-calm and sharp, cold-seeing as a man is after he has had sexual intercourse with
a woman that he does not love.
“And you, you poor rabbit,” he leaned over and said to Maria, who smiled in her sleep
and moved close against him. “I would have struck thee there awhile back if thou had
spoken. What an animal a man is in a rage.”
He lay close to the girl now with his arms around her and his chin on her shoulder and
lying there he figured out exactly what he would have to do and how he would have to
do it.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway199
And it isn’t so bad, he thought. It really isn’t so bad at all. I don’t know whether any one
has ever done it before. But there will always be people who will do it from now on,
given a similar jam. If we do it and if they hear about it. If they hear about it, yes. If they
do not just wonder how it was we did it. We are too short of people but there is no sense
to worry about that. I will do the bridge with what we have. God, I’m glad I got over being
angry. It was like not being able to breathe in a storm. That being angry is another
damned luxury you can’t afford.
“It’s all figured out, guapa,” he said softly against Maria’s shoulder. “You haven’t been
bothered by any of it. You have not known about it. We’ll be killed but we’ll blow the
bridge. You have not had to worry about it. That isn’t much of a wedding present. But is
not a good night’s sleep supposed to be priceless? You had a good night’s sleep. See if
you can wear that like a ring on your finger. Sleep, guapa. Sleep well, my beloved. I do
not wake thee. That is all I can do for thee now.”
He lay there holding her very lightly, feeling her breathe and feeling her heart beat,
and keeping track of the time on his wrist watch.
36
Andrés had challenged at the government position. That is, he had lain down where
the ground fell sharply away below the triple belt of wire and shouted up at the rock and
earth parapet. There was no continual defensive line and he could easily have passed
this position in the dark and made his way farther into the government territory before
running into some one who would challenge him. But it seemed safer and simpler to get
it over here.
“Salud!” he had shouted. “Salud, milicianos!”
He heard a bolt snick as it was pulled back. Then, from farther down the parapet, a
rifle fired. There was a crashing crack and a downward stab of yellow in the dark.
Andrés had flattened at the click, the top of his head hard against the ground.
“Don’t shoot, Comrades,” Andrés shouted. “Don’t shoot! I want to come in.”
“How many are you?” some one called from behind the parapet.
“One. Me. Alone.”
“Who are you?”
“Andrés Lopez of Villaconejos. From the band of Pablo. With a message.”
“Have you your rifle and equipment?”
“Yes, man.”
“We can take in none without rifle and equipment,” the voice said. “Nor in larger
groups than three.”
“I am alone,” Andrés shouted. “It is important. Let me come in.”
He could hear them talking behind the parapet but not what they were saying. Then
the voice shouted again, “How many are you?”
“One. Me. Alone. For the love of God.”
They were talking behind the parapet again. Then the voice came, “Listen, fascist.”
“I am not a fascist,” Andrés shouted. “I am a guerrillero from the band of Pablo. I come
with a message for the General Staff.”
“He’s crazy,” he heard some one say. “Toss a bomb at him.”
“Listen,” Andrés said. “I am alone. I am completely by myself. I obscenity in the midst
of the holy mysteries that I am alone. Let me come in.”
“He speaks like a Christian,” he heard some one say and laugh.
Then some one else said, “The best thing is to toss a bomb down on him.”
“No,” Andrés shouted. “That would be a great mistake. This is important. Let me come
in.”
It was for this reason that he had never enjoyed trips back and forth between the lines.
Sometimes it was better than others. But it was never good.
“You are alone?” the voice called down again.
“Me cago en la leche,” Andrés shouted. “How many times must I tell thee? I AM“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway200
ALONE.”
“Then if you should be alone stand up and hold thy rifle over thy head.”
Andrés stood up and put the carbine above his head, holding it in both hands.
“Now come through the wire. We have thee covered with the máquina,” the voice
called.
Andrés was in the first zigzag belt of wire. “I need my hands to get through the wire,”
he shouted.
“Keep them up,” the voice commanded.
“I am held fast by the wire,” Andrés called.
“It would have been simpler to have thrown a bomb at him,” a voice said.
“Let him sling his rifle,” another voice said. “He cannot come through there with his
hands above his head. Use a little reason.”
“All these fascists are the same,” the other voice said. “They demand one condition
after another.”
“Listen,” Andrés shouted. “I am no fascist but a guerrillero from the band of Pablo.
We’ve killed more fascists than the typhus.”
“I have never heard of the band of Pablo,” the man who was evidently in command of
the post said. “Neither of Peter nor of Paul nor of any of the other saints nor apostles.
Nor of their bands. Sling thy rifle over thy shoulder and use thy hands to come through
the wire.”
“Before we loose the máquina on thee,” another shouted.
“Qué poco amables sois!” Andrés said. “You’re not very amiable.”
He was working his way through the wire.
“Amables,” some one shouted at him. “We are in a war, man.”
“It begins to appear so,” Andrés said.
“What’s he say?”
Andrés heard a bolt click again.
“Nothing,” he shouted. “I say nothing. Do not shoot until I get through this fornicating
wire.”
“Don’t speak badly of our wire,” some one shouted. “Or we’ll toss a bomb on you.”
“Quiero decir, qué buena alambrada,” Andrés shouted. “What beautiful wire. God in a
latrine. What lovely wire. Soon I will be with thee, brothers.”
“Throw a bomb at him,” he heard the one voice say. “I tell you that’s the soundest way
to deal with the whole thing.”
“Brothers,” Andrés said. He was wet through with sweat and he knew the bomb
advocate was perfectly capable of tossing a grenade at any moment. “I have no
importance.”
“I believe it,” the bomb man said.
“You are right,” Andrés said. He was working carefully through the third belt of wire
and he was very close to the parapet. “I have no importance of any kind. But the affair is
serious. Muy, muy serio.”
“There is no more serious thing than liberty,” the bomb man shouted. “Thou thinkest
there is anything more serious than liberty?” he asked challengingly.
“No, man,” Andrés said, relieved. He knew now he was up against the crazies; the
ones with the black-and-red scarves. “Viva la Libertad!”
“Viva la F. A. I. Viva la C.N.T.,” they shouted back at him from the parapet. “Viva el
anarco-sindicalismo and liberty.”
“Viva nosotros,” Andrés shouted. “Long life to us.”
“He is a coreligionary of ours,” the bomb man said. “And I might have killed him with
this.”
He looked at the grenade in his hand and was deeply moved as Andrés climbed over
the parapet. Putting his arms around him, the grenade still in one hand, so that it rested
against Andrés’s shoulder blade as he embraced him, the bomb man kissed him on
both cheeks.
“I am content that nothing happened to thee, brother,” he said. “I am very content.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway201
“Where is thy officer?” Andrés asked.
“I command here,” a man said. “Let me see thy papers.”
He took them into a dugout and looked at them with the light of a candle. There was
the little square of folded silk with the colors of the Republic and the seal of the S. I. M.
in the center. There was the Salvoconducto or safe-conduct pass giving his name, age,
height, birthplace and mission that Robert Jordan had written out on a sheet from his
notebook and sealed with the S. I. M. rubber stamp and there were the four folded
sheets of the dispatch to Golz which were tied around with a cord and sealed with wax
and the impression of the metal S. I. M. seal that was set in the top end of the wooden
handle of the rubber stamp.
“This I have seen,” the man in command of the post said and handed back the piece
of silk. “This you all have, I know. But its possession proves nothing without this.” He
lifted the Salvoconducto and read it through again. “Where were you born?”
“Villaconejos,” Andrés said.
“And what do they raise there?”
“Melons,” Andrés said. “As all the world knows.”
“Who do you know there?”
“Why? Are you from there?”
“Nay. But I have been there. I am from Aranjuëz.”
“Ask me about any one.”
“Describe José Rincon.”
“Who keeps the bodega?”
“Naturally.”
“With a shaved head and a big belly and a cast in one eye.”
“Then this is valid,” the man said and handed him back the paper. “But what do you do
on their side?”
“Our father had installed himself at Villacastín before the movement,” Andrés said.
“Down there beyond the mountains on the plain. It was there we were surprised by the
movement. Since the movement I have fought with the band of Pablo. But I am in a
great hurry, man, to take that dispatch.”
“How goes it in the country of the fascists?” the man commanding asked. He was in
no hurry.
“Today we had much tomate,” Andrés said proudly. “Today there was plenty of dust
on the road all day. Today they wiped out the band of Sordo.”
“And who is Sordo?” the other asked deprecatingly.
“The leader of one of the best bands in the mountains.”
“All of you should come in to the Republic and join the army,” the officer said. “There is
too much of this silly guerilla nonsense going on. All of you should come in and submit
to our Libertarian discipline. Then when we wished to send out guerillas we would send
them out as they are needed.”
Andrés was a man endowed with almost supreme patience. He had taken the coming
in through the wire calmly. None of this examination had flustered him. He found it
perfectly normal that this man should have no understanding of them nor of what they
were doing and that he should talk idiocy was to be expected. That it should all go
slowly should be expected too; but now he wished to go.
“Listen, Compadre,” he said. “It is very possible that you are right. But I have orders to
deliver that dispatch to the General commanding the Thirty-Fifth Division, which makes
an attack at daylight in these hills and it is already late at night and I must go.”
“What attack? What do you know of an attack?”
“Nay. I know nothing. But I must go now to Navacerrada and go on from there. Wilt
thou send me to thy commander who will give me transport to go on from there? Send
one with me now to respond to him that there be no delay.”
“I distrust all of this greatly,” he said. “It might have been better to have shot thee as
thou approached the wire.”
“You have seen my papers, Comrade, and I have explained my mission,” Andrés told“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway202
him patiently.
“Papers can be forged,” the officer said. “Any fascist could invent such a mission. I will
go with thee myself to the Commander.”
“Good,” Andrés said. “That you should come. But that we should go quickly.”
“Thou, Sanchez. Thou commandest in my place,” the officer said. “Thou knowest thy
duties as well as I do. I take this so-called Comrade to the Commander.”
They started down the shallow trench behind the crest of the hill and in the dark
Andrés smelt the foulness the defenders of the hill crest had made all through the
bracken on that slope. He did not like these people who were like dangerous children;
dirty, foul, undisciplined, kind, loving, silly and ignorant but always dangerous because
they were armed. He, Andrés, was without politics except that he was for the Republic.
He had heard these people talk many times and he thought what they said was often
beautiful and fine to hear but he did not like them. It is not liberty not to bury the mess
one makes, he thought. No animal has more liberty than the cat; but it buries the mess it
makes. The cat is the best anarchist. Until they learn that from the cat I cannot respect
them.
Ahead of him the officer stopped suddenly.
“You have your carabine still,” he said.
“Yes,” Andrés said. “Why not?”
“Give it to me,” the officer said. “You could shoot me in the back with it.”
“Why?” Andrés asked him. “Why would I shoot thee in the back?”
“One never knows,” the officer said. “I trust no one. Give me the carbine.”
Andrés unslung it and handed it to him.
“If it pleases thee to carry it,” he said.
“It is better,” the officer said. “We are safer that way.”
They went on down the hill in the dark.
37
Now Robert Jordan lay with the girl and he watched time passing on his wrist. It went
slowly, almost imperceptibly, for it was a small watch and he could not see the second
hand. But as he watched the minute hand he found he could almost check its motion
with his concentration. The girl’s head was under his chin and when he moved his head
to look at the watch he felt the cropped head against his cheek, and it was as soft but as
alive and silkily rolling as when a marten’s fur rises under the caress of your hand when
you spread the trap jaws open and lift the marten clear and, holding it, stroke the fur
smooth. His throat swelled when his cheek moved against Maria’s hair and there was a
hollow aching from his throat all through him as he held his arms around her; his head
dropped, his eyes close to the watch where the lance-pointed, luminous splinter moved
slowly up the left face of the dial. He could see its movement clearly and steadily now
and he held Maria close now to slow it. He did not want to wake her but he could not
leave her alone now in this last time and he put his lips behind her ear and moved them
up along her neck, feeling the smooth skin and the soft touch of her hair on them. He
could see the hand moving on the watch and he held her tighter and ran the tip of his
tongue along her cheek and onto the lobe of her ear and along the lovely convolutions
to the sweet, firm rim at the top, and his tongue was trembling. He felt the trembling run
through all of the hollow aching and he saw the hand of the watch now mounting in
sharp angle toward the top where the hour was. Now while she still slept he turned her
head and put his lips to hers. They lay there, just touching lightly against the sleep-firm
mouth and he swung them softly across it, feeling them brush lightly. He turned himself
toward her and he felt her shiver along the long, light lovely body and then she sighed,
sleeping, and then she, still sleeping, held him too and then, unsleeping, her lips were
against his firm and hard and pressing and he said, “But the pain.”
And she said, “Nay, there is no pain.”
“Rabbit.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway203
“Nay, speak not.”
“My rabbit.”
“Speak not. Speak not.”
Then they were together so that as the hand on the watch moved, unseen now, they
knew that nothing could ever happen to the one that did not happen to the othei that no
other thing could happen more than this; that this was all and always; this was what had
been and now and whatever was to come. This, that they were not to have, they were
having. They were having now and before and always and now and now and now. Oh,
now, now, now, the only now, and above all now, and there is no other now but thou
now and now is thy prophet. Now and forever now. Come now, now, for there is no now
but now. Yes, now. Now, please now, only now, not anything else only this now, and
where are you and where am I and where is the other one, and not why, not ever why,
only this now; and on and always please then always now, always now, for now always
one now; one only one, there is no other one but one now, one, going now, rising now,
sailing now, leaving now, wheeling now, soaring now, away now, all the way now, all of
all the way now; one and one is one, is one, is one, is one, is still one, is still one, is one
descendingly, is one softly, is one longingly, is one kindly, is one happily, is one in
goodness, is one to cherish, is one now on earth with elbows against the cut and slept-
on branches of the pine tree with the smell of the pine boughs and the night; to earth
conclusively now, and with the morning of the day to come. Then he said, for the other
was only in his head and he had said nothing, “Oh, Maria, I love thee and I thank thee
for this.”
Maria said, “Do not speak. It is better if we do not speak.”
“I must tell thee for it is a great thing.”
“Nay.”
“Rabbit—”
But she held him tight and turned her head away and he asked softly, “Is it pain,
rabbit?”
“Nay,” she said. “It is that I am thankful too to have been another time in la gloria.”
Then afterwards they lay quiet, side by side, all length of ankle, thigh, hip and shoulder
touching, Robert Jordan now with the watch where he could see it again and Maria said,
“We have had much good fortune.”
“Yes,” he said, “we are people of much luck.”
“There is not time to sleep?”
“No,” he said, “it starts soon now.”
“Then if we must rise let us go to get something to eat.”
“All right.”
“Thou. Thou art not worried about anything?”
“No.”
“Truly?”
“No. Not now.”
“But thou hast worried before?”
“For a while.”
“Is it aught I can help?”
“Nay,” he said. “You have helped enough.”
“That? That was for me.”
“That was for us both,” he said. “No one is there alone. Come, rabbit, let us dress.”
But his mind, that was his best companion, was thinking La Gloria. She said La Gloria.
It has nothing to do with glory nor La Gloire that the French write and speak about. It is
the thing that is in the Cante Hondo and in the Saetas. It is in Greco and in San Juan de
la Cruz, of course, and in the others. I am no mystic, but to deny it is as ignorant as
though you denied the telephone or that the earth revolves around the sun or that there
are other planets than this.
How little we know of what there is to know. I wish that I were going to live a long time
instead of going to die today because I have learned much about life in these four days;“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway204
more, I think, than in all the other time. I’d like to be an old man and to really know. I
wonder if you keep on learning or if there is only a certain amount each man can
understand. I thought I knew about so many things that I know nothing of. I wish there
was more time.
“You taught me a lot, guapa,” he said in English.
“What did you say?”
“I have learned much from thee.”
“Qué va,” she said, “it is thou who art educated.”
Educated, he thought. I have the very smallest beginnings of an education. The very
small beginnings. If I die on this day it is a waste because I know a few things now. I
wonder if you only learn them now because you are oversensitized because of the
shortness of the time? There is no such thing as a shortness of time, though. You
should have sense enough to know that too. I have been all my life in these hills since I
have been here. Anselmo is my oldest friend. I know him better than I know Charles,
than I know Chub, than I know Guy, than I know Mike, and I know them well. Agustín,
with his vile mouth, is my brother, and I never had a brother. Maria is my true love and
my wife. I never had a true love. I never had a wife. She is also my sister, and I never
had a sister, and my daughter, and I never will have a daughter. I hate to leave a thing
that is so good. He finished tying his rope-soled shoes.
“I find life very interesting,” he said to Maria. She was sitting beside him on the robe,
her hands clasped around her ankles. Some one moved the blanket aside from the
entrance to the cave and they both saw the light. It was night still and here was no
promise of morning except that as he looked up through the pines he saw how low the
stars had swung. The morning would be coming fast now in this month.
“Roberto,” Maria said.
“Yes, guapa.”
“In this of today we will be together, will we not?”
“After the start, yes.”
“Not at the start?”
“No. Thou wilt be with the horses.”
“I cannot be with thee?”
“No. I have work that only I can do and I would worry about thee.”
“But you will come fast when it is done?”
“Very fast,” he said and grinned in the dark. “Come, guapa, let us go and eat.”
“And thy robe?”
“Roll it up, if it pleases thee.”
“It pleases me,” she said.
“I will help thee.”
“Nay. Let me do it alone.”
She knelt to spread and roll the robe, then changed her mind and stood up and shook
it so it flapped. Then she knelt down again to straighten it and roll it. Robert Jordan
picked up the two packs, holding them carefully so that nothing would spill from the slits
in them, and walked over through the pines to the cave mouth where the smoky blanket
hung. It was ten minutes to three by his watch when he pushed the blanket aside with
his elbow and went into the cave.
38
They were in the cave and the men were standing before the fire Maria was fanning.
Pilar had coffee ready in a pot. She had not gone back to bed at all since she had
roused Robert Jordan and now she was sitting on a stool in the smoky cave sewing the
rip in one of Jordan’s packs. The other pack was already sewed. The firelight lit up her
face.
“Take more of the stew,” she said to Fernando. “What does it matter if thy belly should
be full? There is no doctor to operate if you take a goring.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway205
“Don’t speak that way, woman,” Agustín said. “Thou hast the tongue of the great
whore.”
He was leaning on the automatic rifle, its legs folded close against the fretted barrel,
his pockets were full of grenades, a sack of pans hung from one shoulder, and a full
bandolier of ammunition hung over the other shoulder. He was smoking a cigarette and
he held a bowl of coffee in one hand and blew smoke onto its surface as he raised it to
his lips.
“Thou art a walking hardware store,” Pilar said to him. “Thou canst not walk a hundred
yards with all that.”
“Qué va, woman,” Agustín said. “It is all downhill.”
“There is a climb to the post,” Fernando said. “Before the downward slope
commences.”
“I will climb it like a goat,” Agustín said.
“And thy brother?” he asked Eladio. “Thy famous brother has mucked off?”
Eladio was standing against the wall.
“Shut up,” he said.
He was nervous and he knew they all knew it. He was always nervous and irritable
before action. He moved from the wall to the table and began filling his pockets with
grenades from one of the rawhide-covered panniers that leaned, open, against the table
leg.
Robert Jordan squatted by the pannier beside him. He reached into the pannier and
picked out four grenades. Three were the oval Mill bomb type, serrated, heavy iron with
a spring level held down in position by a cotter pin with pulling rig attached.
“Where did these come from?” he asked Eladio.
“Those? Those are from the Republic. The old man brought them.”
“How are they?”
“Valen más que pesan,” Eladio said. “They are worth a fortune apiece.”
“I brought those,” Anselmo said. “Sixty in one pack. Ninety pounds, Inglés.”
“Have you used those?” Robert Jordan asked Pilar.
“Qué va have we used them?” the woman said. “It was with those Pablo slew the post
at Otero.”
When she mentioned Pablo, Agustín started cursing. Robert Jordan saw the look on
Pilar’s face in the firelight.
“Leave it,” she said to Agustín sharply. “It does no good to talk.”
“Have they always exploded?” Robert Jordan held the graypainted grenade in his
hand, trying the bend of the cotter pin with his thumbnail.
“Always,” Eladio said. “There was not a dud in any of that lot we used.”
“And how quickly?”
“In the distance one can throw it. Quickly. Quickly enough.”
“And these?”
He held up a soup-tin-shaped bomb, with a tape wrapping around a wire loop.
“They are a garbage,” Eladio told him. “They blow. Yes. But it is all flash and no
fragments.”
“But do they always blow?”
“Qué va, always,” Pilar said. “There is no always either with our munitions or theirs.”
“But you said the other always blew.”
“Not me,” Pilar told him. “You asked another, not me. I have seen no always in any of
that stuff.”
“They all blew,” Eladio insisted. “Speak the truth, woman.”
“How do you know they all blew?” Pilar asked him. “It was Pablo who threw them. You
killed no one at Otero.”
“That son of the great whore,” Agustín began.
“Leave it alone,” Pilar said sharply. Then she went on. “They are all much the same,
Inglés. But the corrugated ones are more simple.”
I’d better use one of each on each set, Robert Jordan thought. But the serrated type“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway206
will lash easier and more securely.
“Are you going to be throwing bombs, Inglés?” Agustín asked.
“Why not?” Robert Jordan said.
But crouched there, sorting out the grenades, what he was thinking was: it is
impossible. How I could have deceived myself about it I do not know. We were as sunk
when they attacked Sordo as Sordo was sunk when the snow stopped. It is that you
can’t accept it. You have to go on and make a plan that you know is impossible to carry
out. You made it and now you know it is no good. It’s no good, now, in the morning. You
can take either of the posts absolutely O.K. with what you’ve got here. But you can’t
take them both. You can’t be sure of it, I mean. Don’t deceive yourself. Not when the
daylight comes.
Trying to take them both will never work. Pablo knew that all the time. I suppose he
always intended to muck off but he knew we were cooked when Sordo was attacked.
You can’t base an operation on the presumption that miracles are going to happen. You
will kill them all off and not even get your bridge blown if you have nothing better than
what you have now. You will kill off Pilar, Anselmo, Agustín, Primitivo, this jumpy Eladio,
the worthless gypsy and old Fernando, and you won’t get your bridge blown. Do you
suppose there will be a miracle and Golz will get the message from Andrés and stop it?
If there isn’t, you are going to kill them all off with those orders. Maria too. You’ll kill her
too with those orders. Can’t you even get her out of it? God damn Pablo to hell, he
thought.
No. Don’t get angry. Getting angry is as bad as getting scared. But instead of sleeping
with your girl you should have ridden all night through these hills with the woman to try
to dig up enough people to make it work. Yes, he thought. And if anything happened to
me so I was not here to blow it. Yes. That. That’s why you weren’t out. And you couldn’t
send anybody out because you couldn’t run a chance of losing them and being short
one more. You had to keep what you had and make a plan to do it with them.
But your plan stinks. It stinks, I tell you. It was a night plan and it’s morning now. Night
plans aren’t any good in the morning. The way you think at night is no good in the
morning. So now you know it is no good.
What if John Mosby did get away with things as impossible as this? Sure he did. Much
more difficult. And remember, do not undervaluate the element of surprise. Remember
that. Remember it isn’t goofy if you can make it stick. But that is not the way you are
supposed to make it. You should make it not only possible but sure. But look at how it all
has gone. Well, it was wrong in the first place and such things accentuate disaster as a
snowball rolls up wet snow.
He looked up from where he was squatted by the table and saw Maria and she smiled
at him. He grinned back with the front of his face and selected four more grenades and
put them in his pockets. I could unscrew the detonators and just use them, he thought.
But I don’t think the fragmentation will have any bad effect. It will come instantaneously
with the explosion of the charge and it won’t disperse it. At least, I don’t think it will. I’m
sure it won’t. Have a little confidence, he told himself. And you, last night, thinking about
how you and your grandfather were so terrific and your father was a coward. Show
yourself a little confidence now.
He grinned at Maria again but the grin was still no deeper than the skin that felt tight
over his cheekbones and his mouth.
She thinks you’re wonderful, he thought. I think you stink. And the gloria and all that
nonsense that you had. You had wonderful ideas, didn’t you? You had this world all
taped, didn’t you? The hell with all of that.
Take it easy, he told himself. Don’t get into a rage. That’s just a way out too. There are
always ways out. You’ve got to bite on the nail now. There isn’t any need to deny
everything there’s been just because you are going to lose it. Don’t be like some
damned snake with a broken back biting at itself; and your back isn’t broken either, you
hound. Wait until you’re hurt before you start to cry. Wait until the fight before you get
angry. There’s lots of time for it in a fight. It will be some use to you in a fight.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway207
Pilar came over to him with the bag.
“It is strong now,” she said. “Those grenades are very good, Inglés. You can have
confidence in them.”
“How do you feel, woman?”
She looked at him and shook her head and smiled. He wondered how far into her face
the smile went. It looked deep enough.
“Good,” she said. “Dentro de la gravedad.”
Then she said, squatting by him, “How does it seem to thee now that it is really
starting?”
“That we are few,” Robert Jordan said to her quickly.
“To me, too,” she said. “Very few.”
Then she said still to him alone, “The Maria can hold the horses by herself. I am not
needed for that. We will hobble them. They are cavalry horses and the firing will not
panic them. I will go to the lower post and do that which was the duty of Pablo. In this
way we are one more.”
“Good,” he said. “I thought you might wish to.”
“Nay, Inglés,” Pilar said looking at him closely. “Do not be worried. All will be well.
Remember they expect no such thing to come to them.”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said.
“One other thing, Inglés,” Pilar said as softly as her harsh whisper could be soft. “In
that thing of the hand—”
“What thing of the hand?” he said angrily.
“Nay, listen. Do not be angry, little boy. In regard to that thing of the hand. That is all
gypsy nonsense that I make to give myself an importance. There is no such thing.”
“Leave it alone,” he said coldly.
“Nay,” she said harshly and lovingly. “It is just a lying nonsense that I make. I would
not have thee worry in the day of battle.”
“I am not worried,” Robert Jordan said.
“Yes, Inglés,” she said. “Thou art very worried, for good cause. But all will be well,
Inglés. It is for this that we are born.”
“I don’t need a political commissar,” Robert Jordan told her.
She smiled at him again, smiling fairly and truly with the harsh lips and the wide
mouth, and said, “I care for thee very much, Inglés.”
“I don’t want that now,” he said. “Ni tu, ni Dios.”
“Yes,” Pilar said in that husky whisper. “I know. I only wished to tell thee. And do not
worry. We will do all very well.”
“Why not?” Robert Jordan said and the very thinnest edge of the skin in front of his
face smiled. “Of course we will. All will be well.”
“When do we go?” Pilar asked.
Robert Jordan looked at his watch.
“Any time,” he said.
He handed one of the packs to Anselmo.
“How are you doing, old one?” he asked.
The old man was finishing whittling the last of a pile of wedges he had copied from a
model Robert Jordan had given him. These were extra wedges in case they should be
needed.
“Well,” the old man said and nodded. “So far, very well.” He held his hand out. “Look,”
he said and smiled. His hands were perfectly steady.
“Bueno, y qué?” Robert Jordan said to him. “I can always keep the whole hand steady.
Point with one finger.”
Anselmo pointed. The finger was trembling. He looked at Robert Jordan and shook his
head.
“Mine too,” Robert Jordan showed him. “Always. That is normal.”
“Not for me,” Fernando said. He put his right forefinger out to show them. Then the left
forefinger.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway208
“Canst thou spit?” Agustín asked him and winked at Robert Jordan.
Fernando hawked and spat proudly onto the floor of the cave, then rubbed it in the dirt
with his foot.
“You filthy mule,” Pilar said to him. “Spit in the fire if thou must vaunt thy courage.”
“I would not have spat on the floor, Pilar, if we were not leaving this place,” Fernando
said primly.
“Be careful where you spit today,” Pilar told him. “It may be some place you will not be
leaving.”
“That one speaks like a black cat,” Agustín said. He had the nervous necessity to joke
that is another form of what they all felt.
“I joke,” said Pilar.
“Me too,” said Agustín. “But me cago en la leche, but I will be content when it starts.”
“Where is the gypsy?” Robert Jordan asked Eladio.
“With the horses,” Eladio said. “You can see him from the cave mouth.”
“How is he?”
Eladio grinned. “With much fear,” he said. It reassured him to speak of the fear of
another.
“Listen, Inglés—” Pilar began. Robert Jordan looked toward her and as he did he saw
her mouth open and the unbelieving look come on her face and he swung toward the
cave mouth reaching for his pistol. There, holding the blanket aside with one hand, the
short automatic rifle muzzle with its flash-cone jutting above his shoulder, was Pablo
standing short, wide, bristly-faced, his small red-rimmed eyes looking toward no one in
particular.
“Thou—” Pilar said to him unbelieving. “Thou.”
“Me,” said Pablo evenly. He came into the cave.
“Hola, Inglés,” he said. “I have five from the bands of Elias and Alejandro above with
their horses.”
“And the exploder and the detonators?” Robert Jordan said. “And the other material?”
“I threw them down the gorge into the river,” Pablo said still looking at no one. “But I
have thought of a way to detonate using a grenade.”
“So have I,” Robert Jordan said.
“Have you a drink of anything?” Pablo asked wearily.
Robert Jordan handed him the flask and he swallowed fast, then wiped his mouth on
the back of his hand.
“What passes with you?” Pilar asked.
“Nada,” Pablo said, wiping his mouth again. “Nothing. I have come back.”
“But what?”
“Nothing. I had a moment of weakness. I went away but I am come back.”
He turned to Robert Jordan. “En el fondo no soy cobarde,” he said. “At bottom I am
not a coward.”
But you are very many other things, Robert Jordan thought. Damned if you’re not. But
I’m glad to see you, you son of a bitch.
“Five was all I could get from Elias and Alejandro,” Pablo said. “I have ridden since I
left here. Nine of you could never have done it. Never. I knew that last night when the
Inglés explained it. Never. There are seven men and a corporal at the lower post.
Suppose there is an alarm or that they fight?”
He looked at Robert Jordan now. “When I left I thought you would know that it was
impossible and would give it up. Then after I had thrown away thy material I saw it in
another manner.”
“I am glad to see thee,” Robert Jordan said. He walked over to him. “We are all right
with the grenades. That will work. The other does not matter now.”
“Nay,” Pablo said. “I do nothing for thee. Thou art a thing of bad omen. All of this
comes from thee. Sordo also. But after I had thrown away thy material I found myself
too lonely.”
“Thy mother—” Pilar said.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway209
“So I rode for the others to make it possible for it to be successful. I have brought the
best that I could get. I have left them at the top so I could speak to you, first. They think I
am the leader.”
“Thou art,” Pilar said. “If thee wishes.” Pablo looked at her and said nothing. Then he
said simply and quietly, “I have thought much since the thing of Sordo. I believe if we
must finish we must finish together. But thou, Inglés. I hate thee for bringing this to us.”
“But Pablo—” Fernando, his pockets full of grenades, a bandolier of cartridges over
his shoulder, he still wiping in his pan of stew with a piece of bread, began. “Do you not
believe the operation can be successful? Night before last you said you were convinced
it would be.”
“Give him some more stew,” Pilar said viciously to Maria. Then to Pablo, her eyes
softening, “So you have come back, eh?”
“Yes, woman,” Pablo said.
“Well, thou art welcome,” Pilar said to him. “I did not think thou couldst be the ruin thou
appeared to be.”
“Having done such a thing there is a loneliness that cannot be borne,” Pablo said to
her quietly.
“That cannot be borne,” she mocked him. “That cannot be borne by thee for fifteen
minutes.”
“Do not mock me, woman. I have come back.”
“And thou art welcome,” she said. “Didst not hear me the first time? Drink thy coffee
and let us go. So much theatre tires me.”
“Is that coffee?” Pablo asked.
“Certainly,” Fernando said.
“Give me some, Maria,” Pablo said. “How art thou?” He did not look at her.
“Well,” Maria told him and brought him a bowl of coffee. “Do you want stew?” Pablo
shook his head.
“No me gusta estar solo,” Pablo went on explaining to Pilar as though the others were
not there. “I do not like to be alone. Sabes? Yesterday all day alone working for the
good of all I was not lonely. But last night. Hombre!Qué mal lo pasé!”
“Thy predecessor the famous Judas Iscariot hanged himself,” Pilar said.
“Don’t talk to me that way, woman,” Pablo said. “Have you not seen? I am back. Don’t
talk of Judas nor nothing of that. I am back.”
“How are these people thee brought?” Pilar asked him. “Hast brought anything worth
bringing?”
“Son buenos,” Pablo said. He took a chance and looked at Pilar squarely, then looked
away.
“Buenos y bobos. Good ones and stupids. Ready to die and all. A tu gusto. According
to thy taste. The way you like them.”
Pablo looked Pilar in the eyes again and this time he did not look away. He kept on
looking at her squarely with his small, redrimmed pig eyes.
“Thou,” she said and her husky voice was fond again. “Thou. I suppose if a man has
something once, always something of it remains.”
“Listo,” Pablo said, looking at her squarely and flatly now. “I am ready for what the day
brings.”
“I believe thou art back,” Pilar said to him. “I believe it. But, hombre, thou wert a long
way gone.”
“Lend me another swallow from thy bottle,” Pablo said to Robert Jordan. “And then let
us be going.”
In the dark they came up the hill through the timber to the narrow pass at the top.
They were all loaded heavily and they climbed slowly. The horses had loads too, packed
over the saddles.
“We can cut them loose if it is necessary,” Pilar had said. “But with that, if we can keep
it, we can make another camp.”
“And the rest of the ammunition?” Robert Jordan had asked as they lashed the packs.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway210
“In those saddlebags.”
Robert Jordan felt the weight of his heavy pack, the dragging on his neck from the pull
of his jacket with its pockets full of grenades, the weight of his pistol against his thigh,
and the bulging of his trouser pockets where the clips for the submachine gun were. In
his mouth was the taste of the coffee, in his right hand he carried the submachine gun
and with his left hand he reached and pulled up the collar of his jacket to ease the pull of
the pack straps.
“Inglés,” Pablo said to him, walking close beside him in the dark.
“What, man?”
“These I have brought think this is to be successful because I have brought them,”
Pablo said. “Do not say anything to disillusion them.”
“Good,” Robert Jordan said. “But let us make it successful.”
“They have five horses, sabes?” Pablo said cautiously.
“Good,” said Robert Jordan. “We will keep all the horses together.”
“Good,” said Pablo, and nothing more.
I didn’t think you had experienced any complete conversion on the road to Tarsus, old
Pablo, Robert Jordan thought. No. Your coming back was miracle enough. I don’t think
there will ever be any problem about canonizing you.
“With those five I will deal with the lower post as well as Sordo would have,” Pablo
said. “I will cut the wire and fall back upon the bridge as we convened.”
We went over this all ten minutes ago, Robert Jordan thought. I wonder why this
now—
“There is a possibility of making it to Gredos,” Pablo said. “Truly, I have thought much
of it.”
I believe you’ve had another flash in the last few minutes, Robert Jordan said to
himself. You have had another revelation. But you’re not going to convince me that I am
invited. No, Pablo. Do not ask me to believe too much.
Ever since Pablo had come into the cave and said he had five men Robert Jordan felt
increasingly better. Seeing Pablo again had broken the pattern of tragedy into which the
whole operation had seemed grooved ever since the snow, and since Pablo had been
back he felt not that his luck had turned, since he did not believe in luck, but that the
whole thing had turned for the better and that now it was possible. Instead of the surety
of failure he felt confidence rising in him as a tire begins to fill with air from a slow pump.
There was little difference at first, although there was a definite beginning, as when the
pump starts and the rubber of the tube crawls a little, but it came now as steadily as a
tide rising or the sap rising in a tree until he began to feel the first edge of that negation
of apprehension that often turned into actual happiness before action.
This was the greatest gift that he had, the talent that fitted him for war; that ability not
to ignore but to despise whatever bad ending there could be. This quality was destroyed
by too much responsibility for others or the necessity of undertaking something ill
planned or badly conceived. For in such things the bad ending, failure, could not be
ignored. It was not simply a possibility of harm to one’s self, which could be ignored. He
knew he himself was nothing, and he knew death was nothing. He knew that truly, as
truly as he knew anything. In the last few days he had learned that he himself, with
another person, could be everything. But inside himself he knew that this was the
exception. That we have had, he thought. In that I have been most fortunate. That was
given to me, perhaps, because I never asked for it. That cannot be taken away nor lost.
But that is over and done with now on this morning and what there is to do now is our
work.
And you, he said to himself, I am glad to see you getting a little something back that
was badly missing for a time. But you were pretty bad back there. I was ashamed
enough of you, there for a while. Only I was you. There wasn’t any me to judge you. We
were all in bad shape. You and me and both of us. Come on now. Quit thinking like a
schizophrenic. One at a time, now. You’re all right again now. But listen, you must not
think of the girl all day ever. You can do nothing now to protect her except to keep her“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway211
out of it, and that you are doing. There are evidently going to be plenty of horses if you
can believe the signs. The best thing you can do for her is to do the job well and fast
and get out, and thinking of her will only handicap you in this. So do not think of her
ever.
Having thought this out he waited until Maria came up walking with Pilar and Rafael
and the horses.
“Hi, guapa,” he said to her in the dark, “how are you?”
“I am well, Roberto,” she said.
“Don’t worry about anything,” he said to her and shifting the gun to his left hand he put
a hand on her shoulder.
“I do not,” she said.
“It is all very well organized,” he told her. “Rafael will be with thee with the horses.”
“I would rather be with thee.”
“Nay. The horses is where thou art most useful.”
“Good,” she said. “There I will be.”
Just then one of the horses whinnied and from the open place below the opening
through the rocks a horse answered, the neigh rising into a shrill sharply broken quaver.
Robert Jordan saw the bulk of the new horses ahead in the dark. He pressed forward
and came up to them with Pablo. The men were standing by their mounts.
“Salud,” Robert Jordan said.
“Salud,” they answered in the dark. He could not see their faces.
“This is the Inglés who comes with us,” Pablo said. “The dynamiter.”
No one said anything to that. Perhaps they nodded in the dark.
“Let us get going, Pablo,” one man said. “Soon we will have the daylight on us.”
“Did you bring any more grenades?” another asked.
“Plenty,” said Pablo. “Supply yourselves when we leave the animals.”
“Then let us go,” another said. “We’ve been waiting here half the night.”
“Hola, Pilar,” another said as the woman came up.
“Que me maten, if it is not Pepe,” Pilar said huskily. “How are you, shepherd?”
“Good,” said the man. “Dentro de la gravedad.”
“What are you riding?” Pilar asked him.
“The gray of Pablo,” the man said. “It is much horse.”
“Come on,” another man said. “Let us go. There is no good in gossiping here.”
“How art thou, Elicio?” Pilar said to him as he mounted.
“How would I be?” he said rudely. “Come on, woman, we have work to do.”
Pablo mounted the big bay horse.
“Keep thy mouths shut and follow me,” he said. “I will lead you to the place where we
will leave the horses.”
40
During the time that Robert Jordan had slept through, the time he had spent planning
the destruction of the bridge and the time that he had been with Maria, Andrés had
made slow progress. Until he had reached the Republican lines he had travelled across
country and through the fascist lines as fast as a countryman in good physical condition
who knew the country well could travel in the dark. But once inside the Republican lines
it went very slowly.
In theory he should only have had to show the safe-conduct given him by Robert
Jordan stamped with the seal of the S. I. M. and the dispatch which bore the same seal
and be passed along toward his destination with the greatest speed. But first he had
encountered the company commander in the front line who had regarded the whole
mission with owlishly grave suspicion.
He had followed this company commander to battalion headquarters where the
battalion commander, who had been a barber before the movement, was filled with
enthusiasm on hearing the account of his mission. This commander, who was named“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway212
Gomez, cursed the company commander for his stupidity, patted Andrés on the back,
gave him a drink of bad brandy and told him that he himself, the ex-barber, had always
wanted to be a guerrillero. He had then roused his adjutant, turned over the battalion to
him, and sent his orderly to wake up and bring his motorcyclist. Instead of sending
Andrés back to brigade headquarters with the motorcyclist, Gomez had decided to take
him there himself in order to expedite things and, with Andrés holding tight onto the seat
ahead of him, they roared, bumping down the shell-pocked mountain road between the
double row of big trees, the headlight of the motorcycle showing their whitewashed
bases and the places on the trunks where the whitewash and the bark had been
chipped and torn by shell fragments and bullets during the fighting along this road in the
first summer of the movement. They turned into the little smashed-roofed mountain-
resort town where brigade headquarters was and Gomez had braked the motorcycle like
a dirt-track racer and leaned it against the wall of the house where a sleepy sentry came
to attention as Gomez pushed by him into the big room where the walls were covered
with maps and a very sleepy officer with a green eyeshade sat at a desk with a reading
lamp, two telephones and a copy of Mundo Obrero.
This officer looked up at Gomez and said, “What doest thou here? Have you never
heard of the telephone?”
“I must see the Lieutenant-Colonel,” Gomez said.
“He is asleep,” the officer said. “I could see the lights of that bicycle of thine for a mile
coming down the road. Dost wish to bring on a shelling?”
“Call the Lieutenant-Colonel,” Gomez said. “This is a matter of the utmost gravity.”
“He is asleep, I tell thee,” the officer said. “What sort of a bandit is that with thee?” he
nodded toward Andrés.
“He is a guerrillero from the other side of the lines with a dispatch of the utmost
importance for the General Golz who commands the attack that is to be made at dawn
beyond Navacerrada,” Gomez said excitedly and earnestly. “Rouse the Teniente-
Coronel for the love of God.”
The officer looked at him with his droopy eyes shaded by the green celluloid.
“All of you are crazy,” he said. “I know of no General Golz nor of no attack. Take this
sportsman and get back to your battalion.”
“Rouse the Teniente-Coronel, I say,” Gomez said and Andrés saw his mouth
tightening.
“Go obscenity yourself,” the officer said to him lazily and turned away.
Gomez took his heavy 9 mm. Star pistol out of its holster and shoved it against the
officer’s shoulder.
“Rouse him, you fascist bastard,” he said. “Rouse him or I’ll kill you.”
“Calm yourself,” the officer said. “All you barbers are emotional.”
Andrés saw Gomez’s face draw with hate in the light of the reading lamp. But all he
said was, “Rouse him.”
“Orderly,” the officer called in a contemptuous voice.
A soldier came to the door and saluted and went out.
“His fiancée is with him,” the officer said and went back to reading the paper. “It is
certain he will be delighted to see you.”
“It is those like thee who obstruct all effort to win this war,” Gomez said to the staff
officer.
The officer paid no attention to him. Then, as he read on, he remarked, as though to
himself, “What a curious periodical this is!”
“Why don’t you read El Debate then? That is your paper,” Gomez said to him naming
the leading Catholic-Conservative organ published in Madrid before the movement.
“Don’t forget I am thy superior officer and that a report by me on thee carries weight,”
the officer said without looking up. “I never read El Debate. Do not make false
accusations.”
“No. You read A. B. C.,” Gomez said. “The army is still rotten with such as thee. With
professionals such as thee. But it will not always be. We are caught between the“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway213
ignorant and the cynical. But we will educate the one and eliminate the other.”
“‘Purge’ is the word you want,” the officer said, still not looking up. “Here it reports the
purging of more of thy famous Russians. They are purging more than the epsom salts in
this epoch.”
“By any name,” Gomez said passionately. “By any name so that such as thee are
liquidated.”
“Liquidated,” the officer said insolently as though speaking to himself. “Another new
word that has little of Castilian in it.”
“Shot, then,” Gomez said. “That is Castilian. Canst understand it?”
“Yes, man, but do not talk so loudly. There are others beside the Teniente-Coronel
asleep in this Brigade Staff and thy emotion bores me. It was for that reason that I
always shaved myself. I never liked the conversation.”
Gomez looked at Andrés and shook his head. His eyes were shining with the
moistness that rage and hatred can bring. But he shook his head and said nothing as he
stored it all away for some time in the future. He had stored much in the year and a half
in which he had risen to the command of a battalion in the Sierra and now, as the
Lieutenant-Colonel came into the room in his pajamas he drew himself stiff and saluted.
The Lieutenant-Colonel Miranda, who was a short, gray-faced man, who had been in
the army all his life, who had lost the love of his wife in Madrid while he was losing his
digestion in Morocco, and become a Republican when he found he could not divorce his
wife (there was never any question of recovering his digestion), had entered the civil war
as a Lieutenant-Colonel. He had only one ambition, to finish the war with the same rank.
He had defended the Sierra well and he wanted to be left alone there to defend it
whenever it was attacked. He felt much healthier in the war, probably due to the forced
curtailment of the number of meat courses, he had an enormous stock of sodium-
bicarbonate, he had his whiskey in the evening, his twenty-three-year-old mistress was
having a baby, as were nearly all the other girls who had started out as milicianas in the
July of the year before, and now he came into the room, nodded in answer to Gomez’s
salute and put out his hand.
“What brings thee, Gomez?” he asked and then, to the officer at the desk who was his
chief of operation, “Give me a cigarette, please, Pepe.”
Gomez showed him Andrés’s papers and the dispatch. The Lieutenant-Colonel looked
at the Salvoconducto quickly, looked at Andrés, nodded and smiled, and then looked at
the dispatch hungrily. He felt of the seal, tested it with his forefinger, then handed both
the safe-conduct and dispatch back to Andrés.
“Is the life very hard there in the hills?” he asked.
“No, my Lieutenant-Colonel,” Andrés said.
“Did they tell thee where would be the closest point to find General Golz’s
headquarters?”
“Navacerrada, my Lieutenant-Colonel,” Andrés said. “The Inglés said it would be
somewhere close to Navacerrada behind the lines to the right of there.”
“What Inglés?” the Lieutenant-Colonel asked quietly.
“The Inglés who is with us as a dynamiter.”
The Lieutenant-Colonel nodded. It was just another sudden unexplained rarity of this
war. “The Inglés who is with us as a dynamiter.”
“You had better take him, Gomez, on the motor,” the Lieutenant-Colonel said. “Write
them a very strong Salvoconducto to the Estado Mayor of General Golz for me to sign,”
he said to the officer in the green celluloid eyeshade. “Write it on the machine, Pepe.
Here are the details,” he motioned for Andrés to hand over his safe-conduct, “and put on
two seals.” He turned to Gomez. “You will need something strong tonight. It is rightly so.
People should be careful when an offensive is projected. I will give you something as
strong as I can make it.” Then to Andrés, very kindly, he said, “Dost wish anything? To
eat or to drink?”
“No, my Lieutenant-Colonel,” Andrés said. “I am not hungry. They gave me cognac at
the last place of command and more would make me seasick.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway214
“Did you see any movement or activity opposite my front as you came through?” the
Lieutenant-Colonel asked Andrés politely.
“It was as usual, my Lieutenant-Colonel. Quiet. Quiet.”
“Did I not meet thee in Cercedilla about three months back?” the Lieutenant-Colonel
asked.
“Yes, my Lieutenant-Colonel.”
“I thought so,” the Lieutenant-Colonel patted him on the shoulder. “You were with the
old man Anselmo. How is he?”
“He is well, my Lieutenant-Colonel,” Andrés told him.
“Good. It makes me happy,” the Lieutenant-Colonel said. The officer showed him what
he had typed and he read it over and signed it. “You must go now quickly,” he said to
Gomez and Andrés. “Be careful with the motor,” he said to Gomez. “Use your lights.
Nothing will happen from a single motor and you must be careful. My compliments to
Comrade General Golz. We met after Peguerinos.” He shook hands with them both.
“Button the papers inside thy shirt,” he said. “There is much wind on a motor.”
After they went out he went to a cabinet, took out a glass and a bottle, and poured
himself some whiskey and poured plain water into it from an earthenware crock that
stood on the floor against the wall. Then holding the glass and sipping the whiskey very
slowly he stood in front of the big map on the wall and studied the offensive possibilities
in the country above Navacerrada.
“I am glad it is Golz and not me,” he said finally to the officer who sat at the table. The
officer did not answer and looking away from the map and at the officer the Lieutenant-
Colonel saw he was asleep with his head on his arms. The Lieutenant-Colonel went
over to the desk and pushed the two phones close together so that one touched the
officer’s head on either side. Then he walked to the cupboard, poured himself another
whiskey, put water in it, and went back to the map again.
Andrés, holding tight onto the seat where Gomez was forking the motor, bent his head
against the wind as the motorcycle moved, noisily exploding, into the light-split darkness
of the country road that opened ahead sharp with the high black of the poplars beside it,
dimmed and yellow-soft now as the road dipped into the fog along a stream bed,
sharpening hard again as the road rose and, ahead of them at the crossroads, the
headlight showed the gray bulk of the empty trucks coming down from the mountains.
41
Pablo stopped and dismounted in the dark. Robert Jordan heard the creaking and the
heavy breathing as they all dismounted and the clinking of a bridle as a horse tossed his
head. He smelled the horses and the unwashed and sour slept-in-clothing smell of the
new men and the wood-smoky sleep-stale smell of the others who had been in the cave.
Pablo was standing close to him and he smelled the brassy, dead-wine smell that came
from him like the taste of a copper coin in your mouth. He lit a cigarette, cupping his
hand to hide the light, pulled deep on it, and heard Pablo say very softly, “Get the
grenade sack, Pilar, while we hobble these.”
“Agustín,” Robert Jordan said in a whisper, “you and Anselmo come now with me to
the bridge. Have you the sack of pans for the máquina?”
“Yes,” Agustín said. “Why not?”
Robert Jordan went over to where Pilar was unpacking one of the horses with the help
of Primitivo.
“Listen, woman,” he said softly.
“What now?” she whispered huskily, swinging a cinch hook clear from under the
horse’s belly.
“Thou understandest that there is to be no attack on the post until thou hearest the
falling of the bombs?”
“How many times dost thou have to tell me?” Pilar said. “You are getting like an old
woman, Inglés.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway215
“Only to check,” Robert Jordan said. “And after the destruction of the post you fall
back onto the bridge and cover the road from above and my left flank.”
“The first time thou outlined it I understood it as well as I will ever understand it,” Pilar
whispered to him. “Get thee about thy business.”
“That no one should make a move nor fire a shot nor throw a bomb until the noise of
the bombardment comes,” Robert Jordan said softly.
“Do not molest me more,” Pilar whispered angrily. “I have understood this since we
were at Sordo’s.”
Robert Jordan went to where Pablo was tying the horses. “I have only hobbled those
which are liable to panic,” Pablo said. “These are tied so a pull of the rope will release
them, see?”
“Good.”
“I will tell the girl and the gypsy how to handle them,” Pablo said. His new men were
standing in a group by themselves leaning on their carbines.
“Dost understand all?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Why not?” Pablo said. “Destroy the post. Cut the wire. Fall back on the bridge. Cover
the bridge until thou blowest.”
“And nothing to start until the commencement of the bombardment.”
“Thus it is.”
“Well then, much luck.”
Pablo grunted. Then he said, “Thou wilt cover us well with the máquina and with thy
small máquina when we come back, eh, Inglés?”
“Dela primera,” Robert Jordan said. “Off the top of the basket.”
“Then,” Pablo said. “Nothing more. But in that moment thou must be very careful,
Inglés. It will not be simple to do that unless thou art very careful.”
“I will handle the máquina myself,” Robert Jordan said to him.
“Hast thou much experience? For I am of no mind to be shot by Agustín with his belly
full of good intentions.”
“I have much experience. Truly. And if Agustín uses either máquina I will see that he
keeps it way above thee. Above, above and above.”
“Then nothing more,” Pablo said. Then he said softly and confidentially, “There is still
a lack of horses.”
The son of a bitch, Robert Jordan thought. Or does he think I did not understand him
the first time.
“I go on foot,” he said. “The horses are thy affair.”
“Nay, there will be a horse for thee, Inglés,” Pablo said softly. “There will be horses for
all of us.”
“That is thy problem,” Robert Jordan said. “Thou dost not have to count me. Hast
enough rounds for thy new máquina?”
“Yes,” Pablo said. “All that the cavalryman carried. I have fired only four to try it. I tried
it yesterday in the high hills.”
“We go now,” Robert Jordan said. “We must be there early and well hidden.”
“We all go now,” Pablo said. “Suerte, Inglés.”
I wonder what the bastard is planning now, Robert Jordan said. But I am pretty sure I
know. Well, that is his, not mine. Thank God I do not know these new men.
He put his hand out and said, “Suerte, Pablo,” and their two hands gripped in the dark.
Robert Jordan, when he put his hand out, expected that it would be like grasping
something reptilian or touching a leper. He did not know what Pablo’s hand would feel
like. But in the dark Pablo’s hand gripped his hard and pressed it frankly and he
returned the grip. Pablo had a good hand in the dark and feeling it gave Robert Jordan
the strangest feeling he had felt that morning. We must be allies now, he thought. There
was always much handshaking with allies. Not to mention decorations and kissing on
both cheeks, he thought. I’m glad we do not have to do that. I suppose all allies are like
this. They always hate each other au fond. But this Pablo is a strange man.
“Suerte, Pablo,” he said and gripped the strange, firm, purposeful hand hard. “I will“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway216
cover thee well. Do not worry.”
“I am sorry for having taken thy material,” Pablo said. “It was an equivocation.”
“But thou has brought what we needed.”
“I do not hold this of the bridge against thee, Inglés,” Pablo said. “I see a successful
termination for it.”
“What are you two doing? Becoming maricones?” Pilar said suddenly beside them in
the dark. “That is all thou hast lacked,” she said to Pablo. “Get along, Inglés, and cut thy
good-bys short before this one steals the rest of thy explosive.”
“Thou dost not understand me, woman,” Pablo said. “The Inglés and I understand one
another.”
“Nobody understands thee. Neither God nor thy mother,” Pilar said. “Nor I either. Get
along, Inglés. Make thy good-bys with thy cropped head and go. Me cago en tu padre,
but I begin to think thou art afraid to see the bull come out.”
“Thy mother,” Robert Jordan said.
“Thou never hadst one,” Pilar whispered cheerfully. “Now go, because I have a great
desire to start this and get it over with. Go with thy people,” she said to Pablo. “Who
knows how long their stern resolution is good for? Thou hast a couple that I would not
trade thee for. Take them and go.”
Robert Jordan slung his pack on his back and walked over to the horses to find Maria.
“Good-by, guapa,” he said. “I will see thee soon.”
He had an unreal feeling about all of this now as though he had said it all before or as
though it were a train that were going, especially as though it were a train and he was
standing on the platform of a railway station.
“Good-by, Roberto,” she said. “Take much care.”
“Of course,” he said. He bent his head to kiss her and his pack rolled forward against
the back of his head so that his forehead bumped hers hard. As this happened he knew
this had happened before too.
“Don’t cry,” he said, awkward not only from the load.
“I do not,” she said. “But come back quickly.”
“Do not worry when you hear the firing. There is bound to be much firing.”
“Nay. Only come back quickly.”
“Good-by, guapa,” he said awkwardly.
“Salud, Roberto.”
Robert Jordan had not felt this young since he had taken the train at Red Lodge to go
down to Billings to get the train there to go away to school for the first time. He had been
afraid to go and he did not want any one to know it and, at the station, just before the
conductor picked up the box he would step up on to reach the steps of the day coach,
his father had kissed him good-by and said, “May the Lord watch between thee and me
while we are absent the one from the other.” His father had been a very religious man
and he had said it simply and sincerely. But his moustache had been moist and his eyes
were damp with emotion and Robert Jordan had been so embarrassed by all of it, the
damp religious sound of the prayer, and by his father kissing him good-by, that he had
felt suddenly so much older than his father and sorry for him that he could hardly bear it.
After the train started he had stood on the rear platform and watched the station and
the water tower grow smaller and smaller and the rails crossed by the ties narrowed
toward a point where the station and the water tower stood now minute and tiny in the
steady clicking that was taking him away.
The brakeman said, “Dad seemed to take your going sort of hard, Bob.”
“Yes,” he had said watching the sagebrush that ran from the edge of the road bed
between the passing telegraph poles across to the streaming-by dusty stretching of the
road. He was looking for sage hens.
“You don’t mind going away to school?”
“No,” he had said and it was true.
It would not have been true before but it was true that minute and it was only now, at
this parting, that he ever felt as young again as he had felt before that train left. He felt“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway217
very young now and very awkward and he was saying good-by as awkwardly as one
can be when saying good-by to a young girl when you are a boy in school, saying good-
by at the front porch, not knowing whether to kiss the girl or not. Then he knew it was
not the good-by he was being awkward about. It was the meeting he was going to. The
good-by was only a part of the awkwardness he felt about the meeting.
You’re getting them again, he told himself. But I suppose there is no one that does not
feel that he is too young to do it. He would not put a name to it. Come on, he said to
himself. Come on. It is too early for your second childhood.
“Good-by, guapa,” he said. “Good-by, rabbit.”
“Good-by, my Roberto,” she said and he went over to where Anselmo and Agustín
were standing and said, “Vamonos.”
Anselmo swung his heavy pack up. Agustín, fully loaded since the cave, was leaning
against a tree, the automatic rifle jutting over the top of his load.
“Good,” he said, “Vamonos.”
The three of them started down the hill.
“Buena suerte, Don Roberto,” Fernando said as the three of them passed him as they
moved in single file between the trees. Fernando was crouched on his haunches a little
way from where they passed but he spoke with great dignity.
“Buena suerte thyself, Fernando,” Robert Jordan said.
“In everything thou doest,” Agustín said.
“Thank you, Don Roberto,” Fernando said, undisturbed by Agustín.
“That one is a phenomenon, Inglés,” Agustín whispered.
“I believe thee,” Robert Jordan said. “Can I help thee? Thou art loaded like a horse.”
“I am all right,” Agustín said. “Man, but I am content we are started.”
“Speak softly,” Anselmo said. “From now on speak little and softly.”
Walking carefully, downhill, Anselmo in the lead, Agustín next, Robert Jordan placing
his feet carefully so that he would not slip, feeling the dead pine needles under his rope-
soled shoes, bumping a tree root with one foot and putting a hand forward and feeling
the cold metal jut of the automatic rifle barrel and the folded legs of the tripod, then
working sideways down the hill, his shoes sliding and grooving the forest floor, putting
his left hand out again and touching the rough bark of a tree trunk, then as he braced
himself his hand feeling a smooth place, the base of the palm of his hand coming away
sticky from the resinous sap where a blaze had been cut, they dropped down the steep
wooded hillside to the point above the bridge where Robert Jordan and Anselmo had
watched the first day.
Now Anselmo was halted by a pine tree in the dark and he took Robert Jordan’s wrist
and whispered, so low Jordan could hardly hear him, “Look. There is the fire in his
brazier.”
It was a point of light below where Robert Jordan knew the bridge joined the road.
“Here is where we watched,” Anselmo said. He took Robert Jordan’s hand and bent it
down to touch a small fresh blaze low on a tree trunk. “This I marked while thou
watched. To the right is where thou wished to put the máquina.”
“We will place it there.”
“Good.”
They put the packs down behind the base of the pine trunks and the two of them
followed Anselmo over to the level place where there was a clump of seedling pines.
“It is here,” Anselmo said. “Just here.”
“From here, with daylight,” Robert Jordan crouched behind the small trees whispered
to Agustín, “thou wilt see a small stretch of road and the entrance to the bridge. Thou
wilt see the length of the bridge and a small stretch of road at the other end before it
rounds the curve of the rocks.”
Agustín said nothing.
“Here thou wilt lie while we prepare the exploding and fire on anything that comes
from above or below.”
“Where is that light?” Agustín asked.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway218
“In the sentry box at this end,” Robert Jordan whispered.
“Who deals with the sentries?”
“The old man and I, as I told thee. But if we do not deal with them, thou must fire into
the sentry boxes and at them if thou seest them.”
“Yes. You told me that.”
“After the explosion when the people of Pablo come around that corner, thou must fire
over their heads if others come after them. Thou must fire high above them when they
appear in any event that others must not come. Understandest thou?”
“Why not? It is as thou saidst last night.”
“Hast any questions?”
“Nay. I have two sacks. I can load them from above where it will not be seen and bring
them here.”
“But do no digging here. Thou must be as well hid as we were at the top.”
“Nay. I will bring the dirt in them in the dark. You will see. They will not show as I will
fix them.”
“Thou are very close. Sabes? In the daylight this clump shows clearly from below.”
“Do not worry, Inglés. Where goest thou?”
“I go close below with the small máquina of mine. The old man will cross the gorge
now to be ready for the box of the other end. It faces in that direction.”
“Then nothing more,” said Agustín. “Salud, Inglés. Hast thou tobacco?”
“Thou canst not smoke. It is too close.”
“Nay. Just to hold in the mouth. To smoke later.”
Robert Jordan gave him his cigarette case and Agustín took three cigarettes and put
them inside the front flap of his herdsman’s flat cap. He spread the legs of his tripod with
the gun muzzle in the low pines and commenced unpacking his load by touch and laying
the things where he wanted them.
“Nada mas,” he said. “Well, nothing more.”
Anselmo and Robert Jordan left him there and went back to where the packs were.
“Where had we best leave them?” Robert Jordan whispered.
“I think here. But canst thou be sure of the sentry with thy small máquina from here?”
“Is this exactly where we were on that day?”
“The same tree,” Anselmo said so low Jordan could barely hear him and he knew he
was speaking without moving his lips as he had spoken that first day. “I marked it with
my knife.”
Robert Jordan had the feeling again of it all having happened before, but this time it
came from his own repetition of a query and Anselmo’s answer. It had been the same
with Agustín, who had asked a question about the sentries although he knew the
answer.
“It is close enough. Even too close,” he whispered. “But the light is behind us. We are
all right here.”
“Then I will go now to cross the gorge and be in position at the other end,” Anselmo
said. Then he said, “Pardon me, Inglés. So that there is no mistake. In case I am
stupid.”
“What?” he breathed very softly.
“Only to repeat it so that I will do it exactly.”
“When I fire, thou wilt fire. When thy man is eliminated, cross the bridge to me. I will
have the packs down there and thou wilt do as I tell thee in the placing of the charges.
Everything I will tell thee. If aught happens to me do it thyself as I showed thee. Take thy
time and do it well, wedging all securely with the wooden wedges and lashing the
grenades firmly.”
“It is all clear to me,” Anselmo said. “I remember it all. Now I go. Keep thee well
covered, Inglés, when daylight comes.”
“When thou firest,” Robert Jordan said, “take a rest and make very sure. Do not think
of it as a man but as a target, de acuerdo? Do not shoot at the whole man but at a point.
Shoot for the exact center of the belly—if he faces thee. At the middle of the back, if he“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway219
is looking away. Listen, old one. When I fire if the man is sitting down he will stand up
before he runs or crouches. Shoot then. If he is still sitting down shoot. Do not wait. But
make sure. Get to within fifty yards. Thou art a hunter. Thou hast no problem.”
“I will do as thou orderest,” Anselmo said.
“Yes. I order it thus,” Robert Jordan said.
I’m glad I remembered to make it an order, he thought. That helps him out. That takes
some of the curse off. I hope it does, anyway. Some of it. I had forgotten about what he
told me that first day about the killing.
“It is thus I have ordered,” he said. “Now go.”
“Me voy,” said Anselmo. “Until soon, Inglés.”
“Until soon, old one,” Robert Jordan said.
He remembered his father in the railway station and the wetness of that farewell and
he did not say Salud nor good-by nor good luck nor anything like that.
“Hast wiped the oil from the bore of thy gun, old one?” he whispered. “So it will not
throw wild?”
“In the cave,” Anselmo said. “I cleaned them all with the pullthrough.”
“Then until soon,” Robert Jordan said and the old man went off, noiseless on his rope-
soled shoes, swinging wide through the trees.
Robert Jordan lay on the pine-needle floor of the forest and listened to the first stirring
in the branches of the pines of the wind that would come with daylight. He took the clip
out of the submachine gun and worked the lock back and forth. Then he turned the gun,
with the lock open and in the dark he put the muzzle to his lips and blew through the
barrel, the metal tasting greasy and oily as his tongue touched the edge of the bore. He
laid the gun across his forearm, the action up so that no pine needles or rubbish could
get in it, and shucked all the cartridges out of the clip with his thumb and onto a
handkerchief he had spread in front of him. Then, feeling each cartridge in the dark and
turning it in his fingers, he pressed and slid them one at a time back into the clip. Now
the clip was heavy again in his hand and he slid it back into the submachine gun and felt
it click home. He lay on his belly behind the pine trunk, the gun across his left forearm
and watched the point of light below him. Sometimes he could not see it and then he
knew that the man in the sentry box had moved in front of the brazier. Robert Jordan lay
there and waited for daylight.
42
During the time that Pablo had ridden back from the hills to the cave and the time the
band had dropped down to where they had left the horses Andrés had made rapid
progress toward Golz’s headquarters. Where they came onto the main highroad to
Navacerrada on which the trucks were rolling back from the mountain there was a
control. But when Gomez showed the sentry at the control his safe-conduct from the
Lieutenant-Colonel Miranda the sentry put the light from a flashlight on it, showed it to
the other sentry with him, then handed it back and saluted.
“Siga,” he said. “Continue. But without lights.”
The motorcycle roared again and Andrés was holding tight onto the forward seat and
they were moving along the highway, Gomez riding carefully in the traffic. None of the
trucks had lights and they were moving down the road in a long convoy. There were
loaded trucks moving up the road too, and all of them raised a dust that Andrés could
not see in that dark but could only feel as a cloud that blew in his face and that he could
bite between his teeth.
They were close behind the tailboard of a truck now, the motorcycle chugging, then
Gomez speeded up and passed it and another, and another, and another with the other
trucks roaring and rolling down past them on the left. There was a motorcar behind them
now and it blasted into the truck noise and the dust with its klaxon again and again; then
flashed on lights that showed the dust like a solid yellow cloud and surged past them in
a whining rise of gears and a demanding, threatening, bludgeoning of klaxoning.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway220
Then ahead all the trucks were stopped and riding on, working his way ahead past
ambulances, staff cars, an armored car, another, and a third, all halted, like heavy,
metal, gun-jutting turtles in the hot yet settled dust, they found another control where
there had been a smash-up. A truck, halting, had not been seen by the truck which
followed it and the following truck had run into it smashing the rear of the first truck in
and scattering cases of small-arms ammunition over the road. One case had burst open
on landing and as Gomez and Andrés stopped and wheeled the motorcycle forward
through the stalled vehicles to show their safe-conduct at the control Andrés walked
over the brass hulls of the thousand of cartridges scattered across the road in the dust.
The second truck had its radiator completely smashed in. The truck behind it was
touching its tail gate. A hundred more were piling up behind and an overbooted officer
was running back along the road shouting to the drivers to back so that the smashed
truck could be gotten off the road.
There were too many trucks for them to be able to back unless the officer reached the
end of the ever mounting line and stopped it from increasing and Andrés saw him
running, stumbling, with his flashlight, shouting and cursing and, in the dark, the trucks
kept coming up.
The man at the control would not give the safe-conduct back. There were two of them,
with rifles slung on their backs and flashlights in their hands and they were shouting too.
The one carrying the safe-conduct in his hand crossed the road to a truck going in the
downhill direction to tell it to proceed to the next control and tell them there to hold all
trucks until his jam was straightened out. The truck driver listened and went on. Then,
still holding the safeconduct, the control patrol came over, shouting, to the truck driver
whose load was spilled.
“Leave it and get ahead for the love of God so we can clear this!” he shouted at the
driver.
“My transmission is smashed,” the driver, who was bent over by the rear of his truck,
said.
“Obscene your transmission. Go ahead, I say.”
“They do not go ahead when the differential is smashed,” the driver told him and bent
down again.
“Get thyself pulled then, get ahead so that we can get this other obscenity off the
road.”
The driver looked at him sullenly as the control man shone the electric torch on the
smashed rear of the truck.
“Get ahead. Get ahead,” the man shouted, still holding the safeconduct pass in his
hand.
“And my paper,” Gomez spoke to him. “My safe-conduct. We are in a hurry.”
“Take thy safe-conduct to hell,” the man said and handing it to him ran across the road
to halt a down-coming truck.
“Turn thyself at the crossroads and put thyself in position to pull this wreck forward,”
he said to the driver.
“My orders are—”
“Obscenity thy orders. Do as I say.”
The driver let his truck into gear and rolled straight ahead down the road and was
gone in the dust.
As Gomez started the motorcycle ahead onto the now clear right-hand side of the road
past the wrecked truck, Andrés, holding tight again, saw the control guard halting
another truck and the driver leaning from the cab and listening to him.
Now they went fast, swooping along the road that mounted steadily toward the
mountain. All forward traffic had been stalled at the control and there were only the
descending trucks passing, passing and passing on their left as the motorcycle climbed
fast and steadily now until it began to overtake the mounting traffic which had gone on
ahead before the disaster at the control.
Still without lights they passed four more armored cars, then a long line of trucks“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway221
loaded with troops. The troops were silent in the dark and at first Andrés only felt their
presence rising above him, bulking above the truck bodies through the dust as they
passed. Then another staff came behind them blasting with its klaxon and flicking its
lights off and on, and each time the lights shone Andrés saw the troops, steel-helmeted,
their rifles vertical, their machine guns pointed up against the dark sky, etched sharp
against the night that they dropped into when the light flicked off. Once as he passed
close to a troop truck and the lights flashed he saw their faces fixed and sad in the
sudden light. In their steel helmets, riding in the trucks in the dark toward something that
they only knew was an attack, their faces were drawn with each man’s own problem in
the dark and the light revealed them as they would not have looked in day, from shame
to show it to each other, until the bombardment and the attack would commence, and no
man would think about his face.
Andrés now passing them truck after truck, Gomez still keeping successfully ahead of
the following staff car, did not think any of this about their faces. He only thought, “What
an army. What equipment. What a mechanization. Vaya gente! Look at such people.
Here we have the army of the Republic. Look at them. Camion after camion. All
uniformed alike. All with casques of steel on their heads. Look at the máquinas rising
from the trucks against the coming of planes. Look at the army that has been builded!”
And as the motorcycle passed the high gray trucks full of troops, gray trucks with high
square cabs and square ugly radiators, steadily mounting the road in the dust and the
flicking lights of the pursuing staff car, the red star of the army showing in the light when
it passed over the tail gates, showing when the light came onto the sides of the dusty
truck bodies, as they passed, climbing steadily now, the air colder and the road starting
to turn in bends and switchbacks now, the trucks laboring and grinding, some steaming
in the light flashes, the motorcycle laboring now too, and Andrés clinging tight to the
front seat as they climbed, Andrés thought this ride on a motorcycle was mucho, mucho.
He had never been on a motorcycle before and now they were climbing a mountain in
the midst of all the movement that was going to an attack and, as they climbed, he knew
now there was no problem of ever being back in time for the assault on the posts. In this
movement and confusion he would be lucky to get back by the next night. He had never
seen an offensive or any of the preparations for one before and as they rode up the road
he marvelled at the size and power of this army that the Republic had built.
Now they rode on a long slanting, rising stretch of road that ran across the face of the
mountain and the grade was so steep as they neared the top that Gomez told him to get
down and together they pushed the motorcycle up the last steep grade of the pass. At
the left, just past the top, there was a loop of road where cars could turn and there were
lights winking in front of a big stone building that bulked long and dark against the night
sky.
“Let us go to ask there where the headquarters is,” Gomez said to Andrés and they
wheeled the motorcycle over to where two sentries stood in front of the closed door of
the great stone building. Gomez leaned the motorcycle against the wall as a
motorcyclist in a leather suit, showing against the light from inside the building as the
door opened, came out of the door with a dispatch case hung over his shoulder, a
wooden-holstered Mauser pistol swung against his hip. As the light went off, he found
his motorcycle in the dark by the door, pushed it until it sputtered and caught, then
roared off up the road.
At the door Gomez spoke to one of the sentries. “Captain Gomez of the Sixty-Fifth
Brigade,” he said. “Can you tell me where to find the headquarters of General Golz
commanding the ThirtyFifth Division?”
“It isn’t here,” the sentry said.
“What is here?”
“The Comandancia.”
“What comandancia?”
“Well, the Comandancia.”
“The comandancia of what?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway222
“Who art thou to ask so many questions?” the sentry said to Gomez in the dark. Here
on the top of the pass the sky was very clear with the stars out and Andrés, out of the
dust now, could see quite clearly in the dark. Below them, where the road turned to the
right, he could see clearly the outline of the trucks and cars that passed against the sky
line.
“I am Captain Rogelio Gomez of the first battalion of the Sixty-Fifth Brigade and I ask
where is the headquarters of General Golz,” Gomez said.
The sentry opened the door a little way. “Call the corporal of the guard,” he shouted
inside.
Just then a big staff car came up over the turn of the road and circled toward the big
stone building where Andrés and Gomez were standing waiting for the corporal of the
guard. It came toward them and stopped outside the door.
A large man, old and heavy, in an oversized khaki beret, such as chasseurs a pied
wear in the French Army, wearing an overcoat, carrying a map case and wearing a
pistol strapped around his greatcoat, got out of the back of the car with two other men in
the uniform of the International Brigades.
He spoke in French, which Andrés did not understand and of which Gomez, who had
been a barber, knew only a few words, to his chauffeur telling him to get the car away
from the door and into shelter.
As he came into the door with the other two officers, Gomez saw his face clearly in the
light and recognized him. He had seen him at political meetings and he had often read
articles by him in Mundo Obrero translated from the French. He recognized his bushy
eyebrows, his watery gray eyes, his chin and the double chin under it, and he knew him
for one of France’s great modern revolutionary figures who had led the mutiny of the
French Navy in the Black Sea. Gomez knew this man’s high political place in the
International Brigades and he knew this man would know where Golz’s headquarters
were and be able to direct him there. He did not know what this man had become with
time, disappointment, bitterness both domestic and political, and thwarted ambition and
that to question him was one of the most dangerous things that any man could do.
Knowing nothing of this he stepped forward into the path of this man, saluted with his
clenched fist and said, “Comrade Marty, we are the bearers of a dispatch for General
Golz. Can you direct us to his headquarters? It is urgent.”
The tall, heavy old man looked at Gomez with his outthrust head and considered him
carefully with his watery eyes. Even here at the front in the light of a bare electric bulb,
he having just come in from driving in an open car on a brisk night, his gray face had a
look of decay. His face looked as though it were modelled from the waste material you
find under the claws of a very old lion.
“You have what, Comrade?” he asked Gomez, speaking Spanish with a strong
Catalan accent. His eyes glanced sideways at Andrés, slid over him, and went back to
Gomez.
“A dispatch for General Golz to be delivered at his headquarters, Comrade Marty.”
“Where is it from, Comrade?”
“From behind the fascist lines,” Gomez said.
André Marty extended his hand for the dispatch and the other papers. He glanced at
them and put them in his pocket.
“Arrest them both,” he said to the corporal of the guard. “Have them searched and
bring them to me when I send for them.”
With the dispatch in his pocket he strode on into the interior of the big stone house.
Outside in the guard room Gomez and Andrés were being searched by the guard.
“What passes with that man?” Gomez said to one of the guards.
“Está loco,” the guard said. “He is crazy.”
“No. He is a political figure of great importance,” Gomez said. “He is the chief
commissar of the International Brigades.”
“Apesar de eso, está loco,” the corporal of the guard said. “All the same he’s crazy.
What do you behind the fascist lines?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway223
“This comrade is a guerilla from there,” Gomez told him while the man searched him.
“He brings a dispatch to General Golz. Guard well my papers. Be careful with that
money and that bullet on the string. It is from my first wound at Guadarama.”
“Don’t worry,” the corporal said. “Everything will be in this drawer. Why didn’t you ask
me where Golz was?”
“We tried to. I asked the sentry and he called you.”
“But then came the crazy and you asked him. No one should ask him anything. He is
crazy. Thy Golz is up the road three kilometers from here and to the right in the rocks of
the forest.”
“Can you not let us go to him now?”
“Nay. It would be my head. I must take thee to the crazy. Besides, he has thy
dispatch.”
“Can you not tell some one?”
“Yes,” the corporal said. “I will tell the first responsible one I see. All know that he is
crazy.”
“I had always taken him for a great figure,” Gomez said. “For one of the glories of
France.”
“He may be a glory and all,” the corporal said and put his hand on Andrés’s shoulder.
“But he is crazy as a bedbug. He has a mania for shooting people.”
“Truly shooting them?”
“Como lo oyes,” the corporal said. “That old one kills more than the bubonic plague.
Mata más que la peste bubonica. But he doesn’t kill fascists like we do. Qué va. Not in
joke. Mata bichos raros. He kills rare things. Trotzkyites. Divagationers. Any type of rare
beasts.”
Andrés did not understand any of this.
“When we were at Escorial we shot I don’t know how many for him,” the corporal said.
“We always furnish the firing party. The men of the Brigades would not shoot their own
men. Especially the French. To avoid difficulties it is always us who do it. We shot
French. We have shot Belgians. We have shot others of divers nationality. Of all types.
Tiene mania de fusilar gente. Always for political things. He’s crazy. Purifica más que el
Salvarsán. He purifies more than Salvarsan.”
“But you will tell some one of this dispatch?”
“Yes, man. Surely. I know every one of these two Brigades. Every one comes through
here. I know even up to and through the Russians, although only a few speak Spanish.
We will keep this crazy from shooting Spaniards.”
“But the dispatch.”
“The dispatch, too. Do not worry, Comrade. We know how to deal with this crazy. He
is only dangerous with his own people. We understand him now.”
“Bring in the two prisoners,” came the voice of André Marty.
“Quereis echar un trago?” the corporal asked. “Do you want a drink?”
“Why not?”
The corporal took a bottle of anis from a cupboard and both Gomez and Andrés drank.
So did the corporal. He wiped his mouth on his hand.
“Vamonos,” he said.
They went out of the guard room with the swallowed burn of the anis warming their
mouths, their bellies and their hearts and walked down the hall and entered the room
where Marty sat behind a long table, his map spread in front of him, his red-and-blue
pencil, with which he played at being a general officer, in his hand. To Andrés it was
only one more thing. There had been many tonight. There were always many. If your
papers were in order and your heart was good you were in no danger. Eventually they
turned you loose and you were on your way. But the Inglés had said to hurry. He knew
now he could never get back for the bridge but they had a dispatch to deliver and this
old man there at the table had put it in his pocket.
“Stand there,” Marty said without looking up.
“Listen, Comrade Marty,” Gomez broke out, the anis fortifying his anger. “Once tonight“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway224
we have been impeded by the ignorance of the anarchists. Then by the sloth of a
bureaucratic fascist. Now by the oversuspicion of a Communist.”
“Close your mouth,” Marty said without looking up. “This is not a meeting.”
“Comrade Marty, this is a matter of utmost urgence,” Gomez said. “Of the greatest
importance.”
The corporal and the soldier with them were taking a lively interest in this as though
they were at a play they had seen many times but whose excellent moments they could
always savor.
“Everything is of urgence,” Marty said. “All things are of importance.” Now he looked
up at them, holding the pencil. “How did you know Golz was here? Do you understand
how serious it is to come asking for an individual general before an attack? How could
you know such a general would be here?”
“Tell him, tu,” Gomez said to Andrés.
“Comrade General,” Andrés started—André Marty did not correct him in the mistake in
rank—”I was given that packet on the other side of the lines—”
“On the other side of the lines?” Marty said. “Yes, I heard him say you came from the
fascist lines.”
“It was given to me, Comrade General, by an Inglés named Roberto who had come to
us as a dynamiter for this of the bridge. Understandeth?”
“Continue thy story,” Marty said to Andrés; using the term story as you would say lie,
falsehood, or fabrication.
“Well, Comrade General, the Inglés told me to bring it to the General Golz with all
speed. He makes an attack in these hills now on this day and all we ask is to take it to
him now promptly if it pleases the Comrade General.”
Marty shook his head again. He was looking at Andrés but he was not seeing him.
Golz, he thought in a mixture of horror and exultation as a man might feel hearing that
a business enemy had been killed in a particularly nasty motor accident or that some
one you hated but whose probity you had never doubted had been guilty of defalcation.
That Golz should be one of them, too. That Golz should be in such obvious
communication with the fascists. Golz that he had known for nearly twenty years. Golz
who had captured the gold train that winter with Lucacz in Siberia. Golz who had fought
against Kolchak, and in Poland. In the Caucasus. In China, and here since the first
October. But he had been close to Tukachevsky. To Voroshilov, yes, too. But to
Tukachevsky. And to who else? Here to Karkov, of course. And to Lucacz. But all the
Hungarians had been intriguers. He hated Gall. Golz hated Gall. Remember that. Make
a note of that. Golz has always hated Gall. But he favors Putz. Remember that. And
Duval is his chief of staff. See what stems from that. You’ve heard him say Copic’s a
fool. That is definitive. That exists. And now this dispatch from the fascist lines. Only by
pruning out of these rotten branches can the tree remain healthy and grow. The rot must
become apparent for it is to be destroyed. But Golz of all men. That Golz should be one
of the traitors. He knew that you could trust no one. No one. Ever. Not your wife. Not
your brother. Not your oldest comrade. No one. Ever.
“Take them away,” he said to the guards. “Guard them carefully.” The corporal looked
at the soldier. This had been very quiet for one of Marty’s performances.
“Comrade Marty,” Gomez said. “Do not be insane. Listen to me, a loyal officer and
comrade. That is a dispatch that must be delivered. This comrade has brought it through
the fascist lines to give to Comrade General Golz.”
“Take them away,” Marty said, now kindly, to the guard. He was sorry for them as
human beings if it should be necessary to liquidate them. But it was the tragedy of Golz
that oppressed him. That it should be Golz, he thought. He would take the fascist
communication at once to Varloff. No, better he would take it to Golz himself and watch
him as he received it. That was what he would do. How could he be sure of Varloff if
Golz was one of them? No. This was a thing to be very careful about.
Andrés turned to Gomez, “You mean he is not going to send the dispatch?” he asked,
unbelieving.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway225
“Don’t you see?” Gomez said.
“Me cago en su puta madre!” Andrés said. “Está loco.”
“Yes,” Gomez said. “He is crazy. You are crazy! Hear! Crazy!” he shouted at Marty
who was back now bending over the map with his red-and-blue pencil. “Hear me, you
crazy murderer?”
“Take them away,” Marty said to the guard. “Their minds are unhinged by their great
guilt.”
There was a phrase the corporal recognized. He had heard that before.
“You crazy murderer!” Gomez shouted.
“Hijo de la gran puta,” Andrés said to him. “Loco.”
The stupidity of this man angered him. If he was a crazy let him be removed as a
crazy. Let the dispatch be taken from his pocket. God damn this crazy to hell. His heavy
Spanish anger was rising out of his usual calm and good temper. In a little while it would
blind him.
Marty, looking at his map, shook his head sadly as the guards took Gomez and
Andrés out. The guards had enjoyed hearing him cursed but on the whole they had
been disappointed in the performance. They had seen much better ones. André Marty
did not mind the men cursing him. So many men had cursed him at the end. He was
always genuinely sorry for them as human beings. He always told himself that and it
was one of the last true ideas that was left to him that had ever been his own.
He sat there, his moustache and his eyes focused on the map, on the map that he
never truly understood, on the brown tracing of the contours that were traced fine and
concentric as a spider’s web. He could see the heights and the valleys from the
contours but he never really understood why it should be this height and why this valley
was the one. But at the General Staff where, because of the system of Political
Commissars, he could intervene as the political head of the Brigades, he would put his
finger on such and such a numbered, brown-thin-lined encircled spot among the greens
of woods cut by the lines of roads that parallel the never casual winding of a river and
say, “There. That is the point of weakness.”
Gall and Copic, who were men of politics and of ambition, would agree and later, men
who never saw the map, but heard the number of the hill before they left their starting
place and had the earth of diggings on it pointed out, would climb its side to find their
death along its slope or, being halted by machine guns placed in olive groves would
never get up it at all. Or on other fronts they might scale it easily and be no better off
than they had been before. But when Marty put his finger on the map in Golz’s staff the
scarheaded, white-faced General’s jaw muscles would tighten and he would think, “I
should shoot you, André Marty, before I let you put that gray rotten finger on a contour
map of mine. Damn you to hell for all the men you’ve killed by interfering in matters you
know nothing of. Damn the day they named tractor factories and villages and co-
operatives for you so that you are a symbol that I cannot touch. Go and suspect and
exhort and intervene and denounce and butcher some other place and leave my staff
alone.”
But instead of saying that Golz would only lean back away from the leaning bulk, the
pushing finger, the watery gray eyes, the graywhite moustache and the bad breath and
say, “Yes, Comrade Marty. I see your point. It is not well taken, however, and I do not
agree. You can try to go over my head if you like. Yes. You can make it a Party matter
as you say. But I do not agree.”
So now André Marty sat working over his map at the bare table with the raw light on
the unshaded electric light bulb over his head, the overwide beret pulled forward to
shade his eyes, referring to the mimeographed copy of the orders for the attack and
slowly and laboriously working them out on the map as a young officer might work a
problem at a staff college. He was engaged in war. In his mind he was commanding
troops; he had the right to interfere and this he believed to constitute command. So he
sat there with Robert Jordan’s dispatch to Golz in his pocket and Gomez and Andrés
waited in the guard room and Robert Jordan lay in the woods above the bridge.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway226
It is doubtful if the outcome of Andrés’s mission would have been any different if he
and Gomez had been allowed to proceed without André Marty’s hindrance. There was
no one at the front with sufficient authority to cancel the attack. The machinery had been
in motion much too long for it to be stopped suddenly now. There is a great inertia about
all military operations of any size. But once this inertia has been overcome and
movement is under way they are almost as hard to arrest as to initiate.
But on this night the old man, his beret pulled forward, was still sitting at the table with
his map when the door opened and Karkov the Russian journalist came in with two
other Russians in civilian clothes, leather coats and caps. The corporal of the guard
closed the door reluctantly behind them. Karkov had been the first responsible man he
had been able to communicate with.
“Tovarich Marty,” said Karkov in his politely disdainful lisping voice and smiled,
showing his bad teeth.
Marty stood up. He did not like Karkov, but Karkov, coming from Pravda and in direct
communication with Stalin, was at this moment one of the three most important men in
Spain.
“Tovarich Karkov,” he said.
“You are preparing the attack?” Karkov said insolently, nodding toward the map.
“I am studying it,” Marty answered.
“Are you attacking? Or is it Golz?” Karkov asked smoothly.
“I am only a commissar, as you know,” Marty told him.
“No,” Karkov said. “You are modest. You are really a general. You have your map and
your field glasses. But were you not an admiral once, Comrade Marty?”
“I was a gunner’s mate,” said Marty. It was a lie. He had really been a chief yeoman at
the time of the mutiny. But he thought now, always, that he had been a gunner’s mate.
“Ah. I thought you were a first-class yeoman,” Karkov said. “I always get my facts
wrong. It is the mark of the journalist.”
The other Russians had taken no part in the conversation. They were both looking
over Marty’s shoulder at the map and occasionally making a remark to each other in
their own language. Marty and Karkov spoke French after the first greeting.
“It is better not to get facts wrong in Pravda,” Marty said. He said it brusquely to build
himself up again. Karkov always punctured him. The French word is dégonfler and
Marty was worried and made wary by him. It was hard, when Karkov spoke, to
remember with what importance he, André Marty, came from the Central Committee of
the French Communist Party. It was hard to remember, too, that he was untouchable.
Karkov seemed always to touch him so lightly and whenever he wished. Now Karkov
said, “I usually correct them before I send them to Pravda, I am quite accurate in
Pravda. Tell me, Comrade Marty, have you heard anything of any message coming
through for Golz from one of our partizan groups operating toward Segovia? There is an
American comrade there named Jordan that we should have heard from. There have
been reports of fighting there behind the fascist lines. He would have sent a message
through to Golz.”
“An American?” Marty asked. Andrés had said an Inglés. So that is what it was. So he
had been mistaken. Why had those fools spoken to him anyway?”
“Yes,” Karkov looked at him contemptuously, “a young American of slight political
development but a great way with the Spaniards and a fine partizan record. Just give
me the dispatch, Comrade Marty. It has been delayed enough.”
“What dispatch?” Marty asked. It was a very stupid thing to say and he knew it. But he
was not able to admit he was wrong that quickly and he said it anyway to delay the
moment of humiliation, not accepting any humiliation. “And the safe-conduct pass,”
Karkov said through his bad teeth.
André Marty put his hand in his pocket and laid the dispatch on the table. He looked
Karkov squarely in the eye. All right. He was wrong and there was nothing he could do
about it now but he was not accepting any humiliation. “And the safe-conduct pass,”
Karkov said softly.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway227
Marty laid it beside the dispatch.
“Comrade Corporal,” Karkov called in Spanish.
The corporal opened the door and came in. He looked quickly at André Marty, who
stared back at him like an old boar which has been brought to bay by hounds. There
was no fear on Marty’s face and no humiliation. He was only angry, and he was only
temporarily at bay. He knew these dogs could never hold him.
“Take these to the two comrades in the guard room and direct them to General Golz’s
headquarters,” Karkov said. “There has been too much delay.”
The corporal went out and Marty looked after him, then looked at Karkov.
“Tovarich Marty,” Karkov said, “I am going to find out just how untouchable you are.”
Marty looked straight at him and said nothing.
“Don’t start to have any plans about the corporal, either,” Karkov went on. “It was not
the corporal. I saw the two men in the guard room and they spoke to me” (this was a
lie). “I hope all men always will speak to me” (this was the truth although it was the
corpora! who had spoken). But Karkov had this belief in the good which could come
from his own accessibility and the humanizing possibility of benevolent intervention. It
was the one thing he was never cynical about.
“You know when I am in the U.S.S.R. people write to me in Pravda when there is an
injustice in a town in Azerbaijan. Did you know that? They say ‘Karkov will help us.”
André Marty looked at him with no expression on his face except anger and dislike.
There was nothing in his mind now but that Karkov had done something against him. All
right, Karkov, power and all, could watch out.
“This is something else,” Karkov went on, “but it is the same principle. I am going to
find Out just how untouchable you are, Comrade Marty. I would like to know if it could
not be possible to change the name of that tractor factory.”
André Marty looked away from him and back to the map.
“What did young Jordan say?” Karkov asked him.
“I did not read it,” André Marty said. “Et maintenant fiche moi la paix, Comrade
Karkov.”
“Good,” said Karkov. “I leave you to your military labors.”
He stepped out of the room and walked to the guard room. Andrés and Gomez were
already gone and he stood there a moment looking up the road and at the mountain
tops beyond that showed now in the first gray of daylight. We must get on up there, he
thought. It will be soon, now.
Andrés and Gomez were on the motorcycle on the road again and it was getting light.
Now Andrés, holding again to the back of the seat ahead of him as the motorcycle
climbed turn after switchback turn in a faint gray mist that lay over the top of the pass,
felt the motorcycle speed under him, then skid and stop and they were standing by the
motorcycle on a long, down-slope of road and in the woods, on their left, were tanks
covered with pine branches. There were troops here all through the woods. Andrés saw
men carrying the long poles of stretchers over their shoulders. Three staff cars were off
the road to the right, in under the trees, with branches laid against their sides and other
pine branches over their tops.
Gomez wheeled the motorcycle up to one of them. He leaned it against a pine tree
and spoke to the chauffeur who was sitting by the car, his back against a tree.
“I’ll take you to him,” the chauffeur said. “Put thy moto out of sight and cover it with
these.” He pointed to a pile of cut branches.
With the sun just starting to come through the high branches of the pine trees, Gomez
and Andrés followed the chauffeur, whose name was Vicente, through the pines across
the road and up the slope to the entrance of a dugout from the roof of which signal wires
ran on up over the wooded slope. They stood outside while the chauffeur went in and
Andrés admired the construction of the dugout which showed only as a hole in the
hillside, with no dirt scattered about, but which he could see, from the entrance, was
both deep and profound with men moving around in it freely with no need to duck their
heads under the heavy timbered roof.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway228
Vicente, the chauffeur, came out.
“He is up above where they are deploying for the attack,” he said. “I gave it to his
Chief of Staff. He signed for it. Here.”
He handed Gomez the receipted envelope. Gomez gave it to Andrés, who looked at it
and put it inside his shirt.
“What is the name of him who signed?” he asked.
“Duval,” Vicente said.
“Good,” said Andrés. “He was one of the three to whom I might give it.”
“Should we wait for an answer?” Gomez asked Andrés.
“It might be best. Though where I will find the Inglés and the others after that of the
bridge neither God knows.”
“Come wait with me,” Vicente said, “until the General returns. And I will get thee
coffee. Thou must be hungry.”
“And these tanks,” Gomez said to him.
They were passing the branch-covered, mud-colored tanks, each with two deep-
ridged tracks over the pine needles showing where they had swung and backed from
the road. Their 45-mm. guns jutted horizontally under the branches and the drivers and
gunners in their leather coats and ridged helmets sat with their backs against the trees
or lay sleeping on the ground.
“These are the reserve,” Vicente said. “Also these troops are in reserve. Those who
commence the attack are above.”
“They are many,” Andrés said.
“Yes,” Vicente said. “It is a full division.”
Inside the dugout Duval, holding the opened dispatch from Robert Jordan in his left
hand, glancing at his wrist watch on the same hand, reading the dispatch for the fourth
time, each time feeling the sweat come out from under his armpit and run down his
flank, said into the telephone, “Get me position Segovia, then. He’s left? Get me position
Avila.”
He kept on with the phone. It wasn’t any good. He had talked to both brigades. Golz
had been up to inspect the dispositions for the attack and was on his way to an
observation post. He called the observation post and he was not there.
“Get me planes one,” Duval said, suddenly taking all responsibility. He would take
responsibility for holding it up. It was better to hold it up. You could not send them to a
surprise attack against an enemy that was waiting for it. You couldn’t do it. It was just
murder. You couldn’t. You mustn’t. No matter what. They could shoot him if they
wanted. He would call the airfield directly and get the bombardment cancelled. But
suppose it’s just a holding attack? Suppose we were supposed to draw off all that
material and those forces? Suppose that is what it is for? They never tell you it is a
holding attack when you make it.
“Cancel the call to planes one,” he told the signaller. “Get me the Sixty-Ninth Brigade
observation post.”
He was still calling there when he heard the first sound of the planes.
It was just then he got through to the observation post.
“Yes,” Golz said quietly.
He was sitting leaning back against the sandbag, his feet against a rock, a cigarette
hung from his lower lip and he was looking up and over his shoulder while he was
talking. He was seeing the expanding wedges of threes, silver and thundering in the sky
that were coming over the far shoulder of the mountain where the first sun was striking.
He watched them come shining and beautiful in the sun. He saw the twin circles of light
where the sun shone on the propellers as they came.
“Yes,” he said into the telephone, speaking in French because it was Duval on the
wire. “Nous sommes foutus. Oui. Comme toujours. Oui. C’est dommage. Oui. It’s a
shame it came too late.”
His eyes, watching the planes coming, were very proud. He saw the red wing
markings now and he watched their steady, stately roaring advance. This was how it“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway229
could be. These were our planes. They had come, crated on ships, from the Black Sea
through the Straits of Marmora, through the Dardanelles, through the Mediterranean and
to here, unloaded lovingly at Alicante, assembled ably, tested and found perfect and
now flown in lovely hammering precision, the V’s tight and pure as they came now high
and silver in the morning sun to blast those ridges across there and blow them roaring
high so that we can go through.
Golz knew that once they had passed overhead and on, the bombs would fall, looking
like porpoises in the air as they tumbled. And then the ridge tops would spout and roar
in jumping clouds and disappear in one great blowing cloud. Then the tanks would grind
clanking up those two slopes and after them would go his two brigades. And if it had
been a surprise they could go on and down and over and through, pausing, cleaning up,
dealing with, much to do, much to be done intelligently with the tanks helping, with the
tanks wheeling and returning, giving covering fire and others bringing the attackers up
then slipping on and over and through and pushing down beyond. This was how it would
be if there was no treason and if all did what they should.
There were the two ridges, and there were the tanks ahead and there were his two
good brigades ready to leave the woods and here came the planes now. Everything he
had to do had been done as it should be.
But as he watched the planes, almost up to him now, he felt sick at his stomach for he
knew from having heard Jordan’s dispatch over the phone that there would be no one
on those two ridges. They’d be withdrawn a little way below in narrow trenches to
escape the fragments, or hiding in the timber and when the bombers passed they’d get
back up there with their machine guns and their automatic weapons and the anti-tank
guns Jordan had said went up the road, and it would be one famous balls up more. But
the planes, now coming deafeningly, were how it could have been and Golz watching
them, looking up, said into the telephone, “No. Rien a faire. Rien. Faut pas penser. Faut
accepter.”
Golz watched the planes with his hard proud eyes that knew how things could be and
how they would be instead and said, proud of how they could be, believing in how they
could be, even if they never were, “Bon. Nous ferons notre petit possible,” and hung up.
But Duval did not hear him. Sitting at the table holding the receiver, all he heard was
the roar of the planes and he thought, now, maybe this time, listen to them come,
maybe the bombers will blow them all off, maybe we will get a break-through, maybe he
will get the reserves he asked for, maybe this is it, maybe this is the time. Go on. Come
on. Go on. The roar was such that he could not hear what he was thinking.
43
Robert Jordan lay behind the trunk of a pine tree on the slope of the hill above the
road and the bridge and watched it become daylight. He loved this hour of the day
always and now he watched it; feeling it gray within him, as though he were a part of the
slow lightening that comes before the rising of the sun; when solid things darken and
space lightens and the lights that have shone in the night go yellow and then fade as the
day comes. The pine trunks below him were hard and clear now, their trunks solid and
brown and the road was shiny with a wisp of mist over it. The dew had wet him and the
forest floor was soft and he felt the give of the brown, dropped pine needles under his
elbows. Below he saw, through the light mist that rose from the stream bed, the steel of
the bridge, straight and rigid across the gap, with the wooden sentry boxes at each end.
But as he looked the structure of the bridge was still spidery and fine in the mist that
hung over the stream.
He saw the sentry now in his box as he stood, his back with the hanging blanket coat
topped by the steel casque on his head showing as he leaned forward over the hole-
punched petrol tin of the brazier, warming his hands. Robert Jordan heard the stream,
far down in the rocks, and he saw a faint, thin smoke that rose from the sentry box.
He looked at his watch and thought, I wonder if Andrés got through to Golz? If we are“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway230
going to blow it I would like to breathe very slowly and slow up the time again and feel it.
Do you think he made it? Andrés? And if he did would they call it off? If they had time to
call it off? Qué va. Do not worry. They will or they won’t. There are no more decisions
and in a little while you will know. Suppose the attack is successful. Golz said it could
be. That there was a possibility. With our tanks coming down that road, the people
coming through from the right and down and past La Granja and the whole left of the
mountains turned. Why don’t you ever think of how it is to win? You’ve been on the
defensive for so long that you can’t think of that. Sure. But that was before all that stuff
went up this road. That was before all the planes came. Don’t be so naïve. But
remember this that as long as we can hold them here we keep the fascists tied up. They
can’t attack any other country until they finish with us and they can never finish with us.
If the French help at all, if only they leave the frontier open and if we get planes from
America they can never finish with us. Never, if we get anything at all. These people will
fight forever if they’re well armed.
No you must not expect victory here, not for several years maybe. This is just a
holding attack. You must not get illusions about it now. Suppose we got a break-through
today? This is our first big attack. Keep your sense of proportion. But what if we should
have it? Don’t get excited, he told himself. Remember what went up the road. You’ve
done what you could about that. We should have portable short-wave sets, though. We
will, in time. But we haven’t yet. You just watch now and do what you should.
Today is only one day in all the days that will ever be. But what will happen in all the
other days that ever come can depend on what you do today. It’s been that way all this
year. It’s been that way so many times. All of this war is that way. You are getting very
pompous in the early morning, he told himself. Look there what’s coming now.
He saw the two men in blanket capes and steel helmets come around the corner of
the road walking toward the bridge, their rifles slung over their shoulders. One stopped
at the far end of the bridge and was out of sight in the sentry box. The other came on
across the bridge, walking slowly and heavily. He stopped on the bridge and spat into
the gorge, then came on slowly to the near end of the bridge where the other sentry
spoke to him and then started off back over the bridge. The sentry who was relieved
walked faster than the other had done (because he’s going to coffee, Robert Jordan
thought) but he too spat down into the gorge.
I wonder if that is superstition? Robert Jordan thought. I’ll have to take me a spit in
that gorge too. If I can spit by then. No. It can’t be very powerful medicine. It can’t work.
I’ll have to prove it doesn’t work before I am out there.
The new sentry had gone inside the box and sat down. His rifle with the bayonet fixed
was leaning against the wall. Robert Jordan took his glasses from his shirt pocket and
turned the eyepieces until the end of the bridge showed sharp and gray-painted-metal
clear. Then he moved them onto the sentry box.
The sentry sat leaning against the wall. His helmet hung on a peg and his face
showed clearly. Robert Jordan saw he was the same man who had been there on guard
two days before in the afternoon watch. He was wearing the same knitted stocking-cap.
And he had not shaved. His cheeks were sunken and his cheekbones prominent. He
had bushy eyebrows that grew together in the center. He looked sleepy and as Robert
Jordan watched him he yawned. Then he took out a tobacco pouch and a packet of
papers and rolled himself a cigarette. He tried to make a lighter work and finally put it in
his pocket and went over to the brazier, leaned over, reached inside, brought up a piece
of charcoal, juggled it in one hand while he blew on it, then lit the cigarette and tossed
the lump of charcoal back into the brazier.
Robert Jordan, looking through the Zeiss 8-power glasses, watched his face as he
leaned against the wall of the sentry box drawing on the cigarette. Then he took the
glasses down, folded them together and put them in his pocket.
I won’t look at him again, he told himself.
He lay there and watched the road and tried not to think at all. A squirrel chittered from
a pine tree below him and Robert Jordan watched the squirrel come down the tree“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway231
trunk, stopping on his way down to turn his head and look toward where the man was
watching. He saw the squirrel’s eyes, small and bright, and watched his tail jerk in
excitement. Then the squirrel crossed to another tree, moving on the ground in long,
small-pawed, tail-exaggerated bounds. On the tree trunk he looked back at Robert
Jordan, then pulled himself around the trunk and out of sight. Then Robert Jordan heard
the squirrel chitter from a high branch of the pine tree and he watched him there, spread
flat along the branch, his tail jerking.
Robert Jordan looked down through the pines to the sentry box again. He would like to
have had the squirrel with him in his pocket. He would like to have had anything that he
could touch. He rubbed his elbows against the pine needles but it was not the same.
Nobody knows how lonely you can be when you do this. Me, though, I know. I hope that
Rabbit will get out of this all right. Stop that now. Yes, sure. But I can hope that and I do.
That I blow it well and that she gets out all right. Good. Sure. Just that. That is all I want
now.
He lay there now and looked away from the road and the sentry box and across to the
far mountain. Just do not think at all, he told himself. He lay there quietly and watched
the morning come. It was a fine early summer morning and it came very fast now in the
end of May. Once a motorcyclist in a leather coat and all-leather helmet with an
automatic rifle in a holster by his left leg came across the bridge and went on up the
road. Once an ambulance crossed the bridge, passed below him, and went up the road.
But that was all. He smelled the pines and he heard the stream and the bridge showed
clear now and beautiful in the morning light. He lay there behind the pine tree, with the
submachine gun across his left forearm, and he never looked at the sentry box again
until, long after it seemed that it was never coming, that nothing could happen on such a
lovely late May morning, he heard the sudden, clustered, thudding of the bombs.
As he heard the bombs, the first thumping noise of them, before the echo of them
came back in thunder from the mountain, Robert Jordan drew in a long breath and lifted
the submachine gun from where it lay. His arm felt stiff from its weight and his fingers
were heavy with reluctance.
The man in the sentry box stood up when he heard the bombs. Robert Jordan saw
him reach for his rifle and step forward out of the box listening. He stood in the road with
the sun shining on him. The knitted cap was on the side of his head and the sun was on
his unshaved face as he looked up into the sky toward where the planes were bombing.
There was no mist on the road now and Robert Jordan saw the man, clearly and
sharply, standing there on the road looking up at the sky. The sun shone bright on him
through the trees.
Robert Jordan felt his own breath tight now as though a strand of wire bound his chest
and, steadying his elbows, feeling the corrugations of the forward grip against his
fingers, he put the oblong of the foresight, settled now in the notch of the rear, onto the
center of the man’s chest and squeezed the trigger gently.
He felt the quick, liquid, spastic lurching of the gun against his shoulder and on the
road the man, looking surprised and hurt, slid forward on his knees and his forehead
doubled to the road. His rifle fell by him and lay there with one of the man’s fingers
twisted through the trigger guard, his wrist bent forward. The rifle lay, bayonet forward
on the road. Robert Jordan looked away from the man lying with his head doubled under
on the road to the bridge, and the sentry box at the other end. He could not see the
other sentry and he looked down the slope to the right where he knew Agustín was
hidden. Then he heard Anselmo shoot, the shot smashing an echo back from the gorge.
Then he heard him shoot again.
With that second shot came the cracking boom of grenades from around the corner
below the bridge. Then there was the noise of grenades from well up the road to the left.
Then he heard rifle-firing up the road and from below came the noise of Pablo’s cavalry
automatic rifle spat-spat-spat-spatting into the noise of grenades. He saw Anselmo
scrambling down the steep cut to the far end of the bridge and he slung the submachine
gun over his shoulder and picked up the two heavy packs from behind the pine trunks“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway232
and with one in each hand, the packs pulling his arms so that he felt the tendons would
pull out of his shoulders, he ran lurching down the steep slope to the road.
As he ran he heard Agustín shouting, “Buena caza, Inglés. Buena caza!” and he
thought, “Nice hunting, like hell, nice hunting,” and just then he heard Anselmo shoot at
the far end of the bridge, the noise of the shot clanging in the steel girders. He passed
the sentry where he lay and ran onto the bridge, the packs swinging.
The old man came running toward him, holding his carbine in one hand. “Sin
novedad,” he shouted. “There’s nothing wrong. Tuve que rematarlo. I had to finish him.”
Robert Jordan, kneeling, opening the packs in the center of the bridge taking out his
material, saw that tears were running down Anselmo’s cheeks through the gray beard
stubble.
“Yo maté uno tambien,” he said to Anselmo. “I killed one too,” and jerked his head
toward where the sentry lay hunched over in the road at the end of the bridge.
“Yes, man, yes,” Anselmo said. “We have to kill them and we kill them.”
Robert Jordan was climbing down into the framework of the bridge. The girders were
cold and wet with dew under his hands and he climbed carefully, feeling the sun on his
back, bracing himself in a bridge truss, hearing the noise of the tumbling water below
him, hearing firing, too much firing, up the road at the upper post. He was sweating
heavily now and it was cool under the bridge. He had a coil of wire around one arm and
a pair of pliers hung by a thong from his wrist.
“Hand me that down a package at a time, viejo,” he called up to Anselmo. The old
man leaned far over the edge handing down the oblong blocks of explosive and Robert
Jordan reached up for them, shoved them in where he wanted them, packed them
close, braced them, “Wedges, viejo! Give me wedges!” smelling the fresh shingle smell
of the new whittled wedges as he tapped them in tight to hold the charge between the
girders.
Now as he worked, placing, bracing, wedging, lashing tight with wire, thinking only of
demolition, working fast and skillfully as a surgeon works, he heard a rattle of firing from
below on the road. Then there was the noise of a grenade. Then another, booming
through the rushing noise the water made. Then it was quiet from that direction.
“Damn,” he thought. “I wonder what hit them then?”
There was still firing up the road at the upper post. Too damned much firing, and he
was lashing two grenades side by side on top of the braced blocks of explosive, winding
wire over their corrugations so they would hold tight and firm and lashing it tight; twisting
it with the pliers. He felt of the whole thing and then, to make it more solid, tapped in a
wedge above the grenades that blocked the whole charge firmly in against the steel.
“The other side now, viejo,” he shouted up to Anselmo and climbed across through the
trestling, like a bloody Tarzan in a rolled steel forest, he thought, and then coming out
from under the dark, the stream tumbling below him, he looked up and saw Anselmo’s
face as he reached the packages of explosive down to him. Goddamn good face, he
thought. Not crying now. That’s all to the good. And one side done. This side now and
we’re done. This will drop it like what all. Come on. Don’t get excited. Do it. Clean and
fast as the last one. Don’t fumble with it. Take your time. Don’t try to do it faster than you
can. You can’t lose now. Nobody can keep you from blowing one side now. You’re doing
it just the way you should. This is a cool place. Christ, it feels cool as a wine cellar and
there’s no crap. Usually working under a stone bridge it’s full of crap. This is a dream
bridge. A bloody dream bridge. It’s the old man on top who’s in a bad spot. Don’t try to
do it faster than you can. I wish that shooting would be over up above. “Give me some
wedges, viejo.” I don’t like that shooting still. Pilar has got in trouble there. Some of the
post must have been out. Out back; or behind the mill. They’re still shooting. That
means there’s somebody still at the mill. And all that damned sawdust. Those big piles
of sawdust. Sawdust, when it’s old and packed, is good stuff to fight behind. There must
be several of them still. It’s quiet below with Pablo. I wonder what that second flare-up
was. It must have been a car or a motorcyclist. I hope to God they don’t have any
armored cars come up or any tanks. Go on. Put it in just as fast as you can and wedge it“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway233
tight and lash it fast. You’re shaking, like a Goddamn woman. What the hell is the matter
with you? You’re trying to do it too fast. I’ll bet that Goddamn woman up above isn’t
shaking. That Pilar. Maybe she is too. She sounds as though she were in plenty trouble.
She’ll shake if she gets in enough. Like everybody bloody else.
He leaned out and up into the sunlight and as he reached his hand up to take what
Anselmo handed him, his head now above the noise of the falling water, the firing
increased sharply up the road and then the noise of grenades again. Then more
grenades.
“They rushed the sawmill then.”
It’s lucky I’ve got this stuff in blocks, he thought. Instead of sticks. What the hell. It’s
just neater. Although a lousy canvas sack full of jelly would be quicker. Two sacks. No.
One of that would do. And if we just had detonators and the old exploder. That son of a
bitch threw my exploder in the river. That old box and the places that it’s been. In this
river he threw it. That bastard Pablo. He gave them hell there below just now. “Give me
some more of that, viejo.”
The old man’s doing very well. He’s in quite a place up there. He hated to shoot that
sentry. So did I but I didn’t think about it. Nor do I think about it now. You have to do
that. But then Anselmo got a cripple. I know about cripples. I think that killing a man with
an automatic weapon makes it easier. I mean on the one doing it. It is different. After the
first touch it is it that does it. Not you. Save that to go into some other time. You and
your head. You have a nice thinking head old Jordan. Roll Jordan, Roll! They used to
yell that at football when you lugged the ball. Do you know the damned Jordan is really
not much bigger than that creek down there below. At the source, you mean. So is
anything else at the source. This is a place here under this bridge. A home away from
home. Come on Jordan, pull yourself together. This is serious Jordan. Don’t you
understand? Serious. It’s less so all the time. Look at that other side. Para qué? I’m all
right now however she goes. As Maine goes, so goes the nation. As Jordan goes so go
the bloody Israelites. The bridge, I mean. As Jordan goes, so goes the bloody bridge,
other way around, really.
“Give me some more of that, Anselmo old boy,” he said. The old man nodded. “Almost
through,” Robert Jordan said. The old man nodded again.
Finishing wiring the grenades down, he no longer heard the firing from up the road.
Suddenly he was working only with the noise of the stream. He looked down and saw it
boiling up white below him through the boulders and then dropping down to a clear
pebbled pool where one of the wedges he had dropped swung around in the current. As
he looked a trout rose for some insect and made a circle on the surface close to where
the chip was turning. As he twisted the wire tight with the pliers that held these two
grenades in place, he saw, through the metal of the bridge, the sunlight on the green
slope of the mountain. It was brown three days ago, he thought.
Out from the cool dark under the bridge he leaned into the bright sun and shouted to
Anselmo’s bending face, “Give me the big coil of wire.”
The old man handed it down.
For God’s sake don’t loosen them any yet. This will pull them. I wish you could string
them through. But with the length of wire you are using it’s O.K., Robert Jordan thought
as he felt the cotter pins that held the rings that would release the levers on the hand
grenades. He checked that the grenades, lashed on their sides, had room for the levers
to spring when the pins were pulled (the wire that lashed them ran through under the
levers), then he attached a length of wire to one ring, wired it onto the main wire that ran
to the ring of the outside grenade, paid off some slack from the coil and passed it
around a steel brace and then handed the coil up to Anselmo. “Hold it carefully,” he
said.
He climbed up onto the bridge, took the coil from the old man and walked back as fast
as he could pay out wire toward where the sentry was slumped in the road, leaning over
the side of the bridge and paying out wire from the coil as he walked.
“Bring the sacks,” he shouted to Anselmo as he walked backwards. As he passed he“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway234
stooped down and picked up the submachine gun and slung it over his shoulder again.
It was then, looking up from paying out wire, that he saw, well up the road, those who
were coming back from the upper post.
There were four of them, he saw, and then he had to watch his wire so it would be
clear and not foul against any of the outer work of the bridge. Eladio was not with them.
Robert Jordan carried the wire clear past the end of the bridge, took a ioop around the
last stanchion and then ran along the road until he stopped beside a stone marker. He
cut the wire and handed it to Anselmo.
“Hold this, viejo,” he said. “Now walk back with me to the bridge. Take up on it as you
walk. No. I will.”
At the bridge he pulled the wire back out through the hitch so it now ran clear and
unfouled to the grenade rings and handed it, stretching alongside the bridge but running
quite clear, to Anselmo.
“Take this back to that high stone,” he said. “Hold it easily but firmly. Do not put any
force on it. When thou pullest hard, hard, the bridge will blow. Comprendes?”
“Yes.”
“Treat it softly but do not let it sag so it will foul. Keep it lightly firm but not pulling until
thou pullest. Comprendes?”
“Yes.”
“When thou pullest really pull. Do not jerk.”
Robert Jordan while he spoke was looking up the road at the remainder of Pilar’s
band. They were close now and he saw Primitivo and Rafael were supporting Fernando.
He looked to be shot through the groin for he was holding himself there with both hands
while the man and the boy held him on either side. His right leg was dragging, the side
of the shoe scraping on the road as they walked him. Pilar was climbing the bank into
the timber carrying three rifles. Robert Jordan could not see her face but her head was
up and she was climbing as fast as she could.
“How does it go?” Primitivo called.
“Good. We’re almost finished,” Robert Jordan shouted back.
There was no need to ask how it went with them. As he looked away the three were
on the edge of the road and Fernando was shaking his head as they tried to get him up
the bank.
“Give me a rifle here,” Robert Jordan heard him say in a choky voice.
“No, hombre. We will get thee to the horses.”
“What would I do with a horse?” Fernando said. “I am very well here.”
Robert Jordan did not hear the rest for he was speaking to Anselmo.
“Blow it if tanks come,” he said. “But only if they come onto it. Blow it if armored cars
come. If they come onto it. Anything else Pablo will stop.”
“I will not blow it with thee beneath it.”
“Take no account of me. Blow it if thou needest to. I fix the other wire and come back.
Then we will blow it together.”
He started running for the center of the bridge.
Anselmo saw Robert Jordan run up the bridge, coil of wire over his arm, pliers hanging
from one wrist and the submachine gun slung over his back. He saw him climb down
under the rail of the bridge and out of sight. Anselmo held the wire in his hand, his right
hand, and he crouched behind the stone marker and looked down the road and across
the bridge. Halfway between him and the bridge was the sentry, who had settled now
closer to the road, sinking closer onto the smooth road surface as the sun weighed on
his back. His rifle, lying on the road, the bayonet fixed, pointed straight toward Anselmo.
The old man looked past him along the surface of the bridge crossed by the shadows of
the bridge rail to where the road swung to the left along the gorge and then turned out of
sight behind the rocky wall. He looked at the far sentry box with the sun shining on it and
then, conscious of the wire in his hand, he turned his head to where Fernando was
speaking to Primitivo and the gypsy.
“Leave me here,” Fernando said. “It hurts much and there is much hemorrhage inside.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway235
I feel it in the inside when I move.”
“Let us get thee up the slope,” Primitivo said. “Put thy arms around our shoulders and
we will take thy legs.”
“It is inutile,” Fernando said. “Put me here behind a stone. I am as useful here as
above.”
“But when we go,” Primitivo said.
“Leave me here,” Fernando said. “There is no question of my travelling with this. Thus
it gives one horse more. I am very well here. Certainly they will come soon.”
“We can take thee up the hill,” the gypsy said. “Easily.”
He was, naturally, in a deadly hurry to be gone, as was Primitivo. But they had brought
him this far.
“Nay,” Fernando said. “I am very well here. What passes with Eladio?”
The gypsy put his finger on his head to show where the wound had been.
“Here,” he said. “After thee. When we made the rush.”
“Leave me,” Fernando said. Anselmo could see he was suffering much. He held both
hands against his groin now and put his head back against the bank, his legs straight
out before him. His face was gray and sweating.
“Leave me now please, for a favor,” he said. His eyes were shut with pain, the edges
of the lips twitching. “I find myself very well here.”
“Here is a rifle and cartridges,” Primitivo said.
“Is it mine?” Fernando asked, his eyes shut.
“Nay, the Pilar has thine,” Primitivo said. “This is mine.”
“I would prefer my own,” Fernando said. “I am more accustomed to it.”
“I will bring it to thee,” the gypsy lied to him. “Keep this until it comes.”
“I am in a very good position here,” Fernando said. “Both for up the road and for the
bridge.” He opened his eyes, turned his head and looked across the bridge, then shut
them as the pain came.
The gypsy tapped his head and motioned with his thumb to Primitivo for them to be
off.
“Then we will be down for thee,” Primitivo said and started up the slope after the
gypsy, who was climbing fast.
Fernando lay back against the bank. In front of him was one of the whitewashed
stones that marked the edge of the road. His head was in the shadow but the sun shone
on his plugged and bandaged wound and on his hands that were cupped over it. His
legs and his feet also were in the sun. The rifle lay beside him and there were three clips
of cartridges shining in the sun beside the rifle. A fly crawled on his hands but the small
tickling did not come through the pain.
“Fernando!” Anselmo called to him from where he crouched, holding the wire. He had
made a loop in the end of the wire and twisted it close so he could hold it in his fist.
“Fernando!” he called again.
Fernando opened his eyes and looked at him.
“How does it go?” Fernando asked.
“Very good,” Anselmo said. “Now in a minute we will be blowing it.”
“I am pleased. Anything you need me for advise me,” Fernando said and shut his eyes
again and the pain lurched in him.
Anselmo looked away from him and out onto the bridge.
He was watching for the first sight of the coil of wire being handed up onto the bridge
and for the Inglés’s sunburnt head and face to follow it as he would pull himself up the
side. At the same time he was watching beyond the bridge for anything to come around
the far corner of the road. He did not feel afraid now at all and he had not been afraid all
the day. It goes so fast and it is so normal, he thought. I hated the shooting of the guard
and it made me an emotion but that is passed now. How could the Inglés say that the
shooting of a man is like the shooting of an animal? In all hunting I have had an elation
and no feeling of wrong. But to shoot a man gives a feeling as though one had struck
one’s own brother when you are grown men. And to shoot him various times to kill him.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway236
Nay, do not think of that. That gave thee too much emotion and thee ran blubbering
down the bridge like a woman.
That is over, he told himself, and thou canst try to atone for it as for the others. But
now thou has what thou asked for last night coming home across the hills. Thou art in
battle and thou hast no problem. If I die on this morning now it is all right.
Then he looked at Fernando lying there against the bank with his hands cupped over
the groove of his hip, his lips blue, his eyes tight shut, breathing heavily and slowly, and
he thought, If I die may it be quickly. Nay I said I would ask nothing more if I were
granted what I needed for today. So I will not ask. Understand? I ask nothing. Nothing in
any way. Give me what I asked for and I leave all the rest according to discretion.
He listened to the noise that came, far away, of the battle at the pass and he said to
himself, Truly this is a great day. I should realize and know what a day this is.
But there was no lift or any excitement in his heart. That was all gone and there was
nothing but a calmness. And now, as he crouched behind the marker stone with the
looped wire in his hand and another loop of it around his wrist and the gravel beside the
road under his knees he was not lonely nor did he feel in any way alone. He was one
with the wire in his hand and one with the bridge, and one with the charges the Inglés
had placed. He was one with the Inglés still working under the bridge and he was one
with all of the battle and with the Republic.
But there was no excitement. It was all calm now and the sun beat down on his neck
and on his shoulders as he crouched and as he looked up he saw the high, cloudless
sky and the slope of the mountain rising beyond the river and he was not happy but he
was neither lonely nor afraid.
Up the hill slope Pilar lay behind a tree watching the road that came down from the
pass. She had three loaded rifles by her and she handed one to Primitivo as he dropped
down beside her.
“Get down there,” she said. “Behind that tree. Thou, gypsy, over there,” she pointed to
another tree below. “Is he dead?”
“Nay. Not yet,” Primitivo said.
“It was bad luck,” Pilar said. “If we had had two more it need not have happened. He
should have crawled around the sawdust pile. Is he all right there where he is?”
Primitivo shook his head.
“When the Inglés blows the bridge will fragments come this far?” the gypsy asked from
behind his tree.
“I don’t know,” Pilar said. “But Agustín with the máquina is closer than thee. The Inglés
would not have placed him there if it were too close.”
“But I remember with the blowing of the train the lamp of the engine blew by over my
head and pieces of steel flew by like swallows.”
“Thou hast poetic memories,” Pilar said. “Like swallows. Joder! They were like wash
boilers. Listen, gypsy, thou hast comported thyself well today. Now do not let thy fear
catch up with thee.”
“Well, I only asked if it would blow this far so I might keep well behind the tree trunk,”
the gypsy said.
“Keep it thus,” Pilar told him. “How many have we killed?”
“Pues five for us. Two here. Canst thou not see the other at the far end? Look there
toward the bridge. See the box? Look! Dost see?” He pointed. “Then there were eight
below for Pablo. I watched that post for the Inglés.”
Pilar grunted. Then she said violently and raging, “What passes with that Inglés? What
is he obscenitying off under that bridge. Vaya mandanga! Is he building a bridge or
blowing one?”
She raised her head and looked down at Anselmo crouched behind the stone marker.
“Hey, viejo!” she shouted. “What passes with thy obscenity of an Inglés?”
“Patience, woman,” Anselmo called up, holding the wire lightly but firmly. “He is
terminating his work.”
“But what in the name of the great whore does he take so much time about?”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway237
“Es muy concienzudo!” Anselmo shouted. “It is a scientific labor.”
“I obscenity in the milk of science,” Pilar raged to the gypsy. “Let the filth-faced
obscenity blow it and be done. Maria!” she shouted in her deep voice up the hill. “Thy
Inglés—” and she shouted a flood of obscenity about Jordan’s imaginary actions under
the bridge.
“Calm yourself, woman,” Anselmo called from the road. “He is doing an enormous
work. He is finishing it now.”
“The hell with it,” Pilar raged. “It is speed that counts.”
Just then they all heard firing start down the road where Pablo was holding the post he
had taken. Pilar stopped cursing and listened. “Ay,” she said. “Ayee. Ayee. That’s it.”
Robert Jordan heard it as he swung the coil of wire up onto the bridge with one hand
and then pulled himself up after it. As his knees rested on the edge of the iron of the
bridge and his hands were on the surface he heard the machine gun firing around the
bend below. It was a different sound from Pablo’s automatic rifle. He got to his feet,
leaned over, passed his coil of wire clear and commenced to pay out wire as he walked
backwards and sideways along the bridge.
He heard the firing and as he walked he felt it in the pit of his stomach as though it
echoed on his own diaphragm. It was closer now as he walked and he looked back at
the bend of the road. But it was still clear of any car, or tank or men. It was still clear
when he was halfway to the end of the bridge. It was still clear when he was three
quarters of the way, his wire running clear and unfouled, and it was still clear as he
climbed around behind the sentry box, holding his wire out to keep it from catching on
the iron work. Then he was on the road and it was still clear below on the road and then
he was moving fast backwards up the little washed-out gully by the lower side of the
road as an outfielder goes backwards for a long fly ball, keeping the wire taut, and now
he was almost opposite Anselmo’s stone and it was still clear below the bridge.
Then he heard the truck coming down the road and he saw it over his shoulder just
coming onto the long slope and he swung his wrist once around the wire and yelled to
Anselmo, “Blow her!” and he dug his heels in and leaned back hard onto the tension of
the wire with a turn of it around his wrist and the noise of the truck was coming behind
and ahead there was the road with the dead sentry and the long bridge and the stretch
of road below, still clear and then there was a cracking roar and the middle of the bridge
rose up in the air like a wave breaking and he felt the blast from the explosion roll back
against him as he dove on his face in the pebbly gully with his hands holding tight over
his head. His face was down against the pebbles as the bridge settled where it had risen
and the familiar yellow smell of it rolled over him in acrid smoke and then it commenced
to rain pieces of steel.
After the steel stopped falling he was still alive and he raised his head and looked
across the bridge. The center section of it was gone. There were jagged pieces of steel
on the bridge with their bright, new torn edges and ends and these were all over the
road. The truck had stopped up the road about a hundred yards. The driver and the two
men who had been with him were running toward a culvert.
Fernando was still lying against the bank and he was still breathing. His arms straight
by his sides, his hands relaxed.
Anselmo lay face down behind the white marking stone. His left arm was doubled
under his head and his right arm was stretched straight out. The loop of wire was still
around his right fist. Robert Jordan got to his feet, crossed the road, knelt by him and
made sure that he was dead. He did not turn him over to see what the piece of steel had
done. He was dead and that was all.
He looked very small, dead, Robert Jordan thought. He looked small and gray-headed
and Robert Jordan thought, I wonder how he ever carried such big loads if that is the
size he really was. Then he saw the shape of the calves and the thighs in the tight, gray
herdsman’s breeches and the worn soles of the rope-soled shoes and he picked up
Anselmo’s carbine and the two sacks, practically empty now and went over and picked
up the rifle that lay beside Fernando. He kicked a jagged piece of steel off the surface of“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway238
the road. Then he swung the two rifles over his shoulder, holding them by the muzzles,
and started up the slope into the timber. He did not look back nor did he even look
across the bridge at the road. They were still firing around the bend below but he cared
nothing about that now.
He was coughing from the TNT fumes and he felt numb all through himself.
He put one of the rifles down by Pilar where she lay behind the tree. She looked and
saw that made three rifles that she had again.
“You are too high up here,” he said. “There’s a truck up the road where you can’t see
it. They thought it was planes. You better get farther down. I’m going down with Agustín
to cover Pablo.”
“The old one?” she asked him, looking at his face.
“Dead.”
He coughed again, wrackingly, and spat on the ground.
“Thy bridge is blown, Inglés,” Pilar looked at him. “Don’t forget that.”
“I don’t forget anything,” he said. “You have a big voice,” he said to Pilar. “I have heard
thee bellow. Shout up to the Maria and tell her that I am all right.”
“We lost two at the sawmill,” Pilar said, trying to make him understand.
“So I saw,” Robert Jordan said. “Did you do something stupid?”
“Go and obscenity thyself, Inglés,” Pilar said. “Fernando and Eladio were men, too.”
“Why don’t you go up with the horses?” Robert Jordan said. “I can cover here better
than thee.”
“Thou art to cover Pablo.”
“The hell with Pablo. Let him cover himself with mierda.”
“Nay, Inglés. He came back. He has fought much below there. Thou hast not listened?
He is fighting now. Against something bad. Do you not hear?”
“I’ll cover him. But obscenity all of you. Thou and Pablo both.”
“Inglés,” Pilar said. “Calm thyself. I have been with thee in this as no one could be.
Pablo did thee a wrong but he returned.”
“If I had had the exploder the old man would not have been killed. I could have blown
it from here.”
“If, if, if—” Pilar said.
The anger and the emptiness and the hate that had come with the let-down after the
bridge, when he had looked up from where he had lain and crouching, seen Anselmo
dead, were still all through him. In him, too, was despair from the sorrow that soldiers
turn to hatred in order that they may continue to be soldiers. Now it was over he was
lonely, detached and unelated and he hated every one he saw.
“If there had been no snow—” Pilar said. And then, not suddenly, as a physical
release could have been (if the woman would have put her arm around him, say) but
slowly and from his head he began to accept it and let the hate go out. Sure, the snow.
That had done it. The snow. Done itto others. Once you saw it again as it was to others,
once you got rid of your own self, the always ridding of self that you had to do in war.
Where there could be no self. Where yourself is only to be lost. Then, from his losing of
it, he heard Pilar say, “Sordo—”
“What?” he said.
“Sordo—”
“Yes,” Robert Jordan said. He grinned at her, a cracked, stiff, too-tightened-facial-
tendoned grin. “Forget it. I was wrong. I am sorry, woman. Let us do this well and all
together. And the bridge is blown, as thou sayest.”
“Yes. Thou must think of things in their place.”
“Then I go now to Agustín. Put thy gypsy much farther down so that he can see well
up the road. Give those guns to Primitivo and take this máquina. Let me show thee.”
“Keep the máquina,” Pilar said. “We will not be here any time. Pablo should come now
and we will be going.”
“Rafael,” Robert Jordan said, “come down here with me. Here. Good. See those
coming out of the culvert. There, above the truck? Coming toward the truck? Hit me one“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway239
of those. Sit. Take it easy.”
The gypsy aimed carefully and fired and as he jerked the bolt back and ejected the
shell Robert Jordan said, “Over. You threw against the rock above. See the rock dust?
Lower, by two feet. Now, careful. They’re running. Good. Sigue tirando.”
“I got one,” the gypsy said. The man was down in the road halfway between the
culvert and the truck. The other two did not stop to drag him. They ran for the culvert
and ducked in.
“Don’t shoot at him,” Robert Jordan said. “Shoot for the top part of a front tire on the
truck. So if you miss you’ll hit the engine. Good.” He watched with the glasses. “A little
lower. Good. You shoot like hell. Mucho! Mucho! Shoot me the top of the radiator.
Anywhere on the radiator. Thou art a champion. Look. Don’t let anything come past that
point there. See?”
“Watch me break the windshield in the truck,” the gypsy said happily.
“Nay. The truck is already sick,” Robert Jordan said. “Hold thy fire until anything
comes down the road. Start firing when it is opposite the culvert. Try to hit the driver.
That you all should fire, then,” he spoke to Pilar who had come farther down the slope
with Primitivo. “You are wonderfully placed here. See how that steepness guards thy
flank?”
“That you should get about thy business with Agustín,” Pilar said. “Desist from thy
lecture. I have seen terrain in my time.”
“Put Primitivo farther up there,” Robert Jordan said. “There. See, man? This side of
where the bank steepens.”
“Leave me,” said Pilar. “Get along, Inglés. Thou and thy perfection. Here there is no
problem.”
Just then they heard the planes.
Maria had been with the horses for a long time, but they were no comfort to her. Nor
was she any to them. From where she was in the forest she could not see the road nor
could she see the bridge and when the firing started she put her arm around the neck of
the big white-faced bay stallion that she had gentled and brought gifts to many times
when the horses had been in the corral in the trees below the camp. But her
nervousness made the big stallion nervous, too, and he jerked his head, his nostrils
widening at the firing and the noise of the bombs. Maria could not keep still and she
walked around patting and gentling the horses and making them all more nervous and
agitated.
She tried to think of the firing not as just a terrible thing that was happening, but to
realize that it was Pablo below with the new men, and Pilar with the others above, and
that she must not worry nor get into a panic but must have confidence in Roberto. But
she could not do this and all the firing above and below the bridge and the distant sound
of the battle that rolled down from the pass like the noise of a far-off storm with a dried,
rolling rattle in it and the irregular beat of the bombs was simply a horrible thing that
almost kept her from breathing.
Then later she heard Pilar’s big voice from away below on the hillside shouting up
some obscenity to her that she could not understand and she thought, Oh, God no, no.
Don’t talk like that with him in peril. Don’t offend any one and make useless risks. Don’t
give any provocation.
Then she commenced to pray for Roberto quickly and automatically as she had done
at school, saying the prayers as fast as she could and counting them on the fingers of
her left hand, praying by tens of each of the two prayers she was repeating. Then the
bridge blew and one horse snapped his halter when he rose and jerked his head at the
cracking roar and he went off through the trees. Maria caught him finally and brought
him back, shivering, trembling, his chest dark with sweat, the saddle down, and coming
back through the trees she heard shooting below and she thought I cannot stand this
longer. I cannot live not knowing any longer. I cannot breathe and my mouth is so dry.
And I am afraid and I am no good and I frighten the horses and only caught this horse
by hazard because he knocked the saddle down against a tree and caught himself“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway240
kicking into the stirrups and now as I get the saddle up, Oh, God, I do not know. I cannot
bear it. Oh please have him be all right for all my heart and all of me is at the bridge.
The Republic is one thing and we must win is another thing. But, Oh, Sweet Blessed
Virgin, bring him back to me from the bridge and I will do anything thou sayest ever.
Because I am not here. There isn’t any me. I am only with him. Take care of him for me
and that will be me and then I will do the things for thee and he will not mind. Nor will it
be against the Republic. Oh, please forgive me for I am very confused. I am too
confused now. But if thou takest care of him I will do whatever is right. I will do what he
says and what you say. With the two of me I will do it. But this now not knowing I cannot
endure.
Then, the horse tied again, she with the saddle up now, the blanket smoothed, hauling
tight on the cinch she heard the big, deep voice from the timber below, “Maria! Maria!
Thy Inglés is all right. Hear me? All right. Sin Novedad!”
Maria held the saddle with both hands and pressed her cropped head hard against it
and cried. She heard the deep voice shouting again and she turned from the saddle and
shouted, choking, “Yes! Thank you!” Then, choking again, “Thank you! Thank you very
much!”
When they heard the planes they all looked up and the planes were coming from
Segovia very high in the sky, silvery in the high sky, their drumming rising over all the
other sounds.
“Those!” Pilar said. “There has only lacked those!”
Robert Jordan put his arm on her shoulders as he watched them. “Nay, woman,” he
said. “Those do not come for us. Those have no time for us. Calm thyself.”
“I hate them.”
“Me too. But now I must go to Agustín.”
He circled the hillside through the pines and all the time there was the throbbing,
drumming of the planes and across the shattered bridge on the road below, around the
bend of the road there was the intermittent hammering fire of a heavy machine gun.
Robert Jordan dropped down to where Agustín lay in the clump of scrub pines behind
the automatic rifle and more planes were coming all the time.
“What passes below?” Agustín said. “What is Pablo doing? Doesn’t he know the
bridge is gone?”
“Maybe he can’t leave.”
“Then let us leave. The hell with him.”
“He will come now if he is able,” Robert Jordan said. “We should see him now.”
“I have not heard him,” Agustín said. “Not for five minutes. No. There! Listen! There he
is. That’s him.”
There was a burst of the spot-spot-spotting fire of the cavalry submachine gun, then
another, then another.
“That’s the bastard,” Robert Jordan said.
He watched still more planes coming over in the high cloudless blue sky and he
watched Agustín’s face as he looked up at them. Then he looked down at the shattered
bridge and across to the stretch of road which still was clear. He coughed and spat and
listened to the heavy machine gun hammer again below the bend. It sounded to be in
the same place that it was before.
“And what’s that?” Agustín asked. “What the unnameable is that?”
“It has been going since before I blew the bridge,” Robert Jordan said. He looked
down at the bridge now and he could see the stream through the torn gap where the
center had fallen, hanging like a bent steel apron. He heard the first of the planes that
had gone over now bombing up above at the pass and more were still coming. The
noise of their motors filled all the high sky and looking up he saw their pursuit, minute
and tiny, circling and wheeling high above them.
“I don’t think they ever crossed the lines the other morning,” Primitivo said. “They must
have swung off to the west and then come back. They could not be making an attack if
they had seen these.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway241
“Most of these are new,” Robert Jordan said.
He had the feeling of something that had started normally and had then brought great,
outsized, giant repercussions. It was as though you had thrown a stone and the stone
made a ripple and the ripple returned roaring and toppling as a tidal wave. Or as though
you shouted and the echo came back in rolls and peals of thunder, and the thunder was
deadly. Or as though you struck one man and he fell and as far as you could see other
men rose up all armed and armored. He was glad he was not with Golz up at the pass.
Lying there, by Agustín, watching the planes going over, listening for firing behind him,
watching the road below where he knew he would see something but not what it would
be, he still felt numb with the surprise that he had not been killed at the bridge. He had
accepted being killed so completely that all of this now seemed unreal. Shake out of
that, he said to himself. Get rid of that. There is much, much, much to be done today.
But it would not leave him and he felt, consciously, all of this becoming like a dream.
“You swallowed too much of that smoke,” he told himself. But he knew it was not that.
He could feel, solidly, how unreal it all was through the absolute reality and he looked
down at the bridge and then back to the sentry lying on the road, to where Anselmo lay,
to Fernando against the bank and back up the smooth, brown road to the stalled truck
and still it was unreal.
“You better sell out your part of you quickly,” he told himself. “You’re like one of those
cocks in the pit where nobody has seen the wound given and it doesn’t show and he is
already going cold with it.”
“Nuts,” he said to himself. “You are a little groggy is all, and you have a let-down after
responsibility, is all. Take it easy.”
Then Agustín grabbed his arm and pointed and he looked across the gorge and saw
Pablo.
They saw Pablo come running around the corner of the bend in the road. At the sheer
rock where the road went out of sight they saw him stop and lean against the rock and
fire back up the road. Robert Jordan saw Pablo, short, heavy and stocky, his cap gone,
leaning against the rock wall and firing the short cavalry automatic rifle and he could see
the bright flicker of the cascading brass hulls as the sun caught them. They saw Pablo
crouch and fire another burst. Then, without looking back, he came running, short,
bowlegged, fast, his head bent down straight toward the bridge.
Robert Jordan had pushed Agustín over and he had the stock of the big automatic rifle
against his shoulder and was sighting on the bend of the road. His own submachine gun
lay by his left hand. It was not accurate enough for that range.
As Pablo came toward them Robert Jordan sighted on the bend but nothing came.
Pablo had reached the bridge, looked over his shoulder once, glanced at the bridge, and
then turned to his left and gone down into the gorge and out of sight. Robert Jordan was
still watching the bend and nothing had come in sight. Agustín got up on one knee. He
could see Pablo climbing down into the gorge like a goat. There had been no noise of
firing below since they had first seen Pablo.
“You see anything up above? On the rocks above?” Robert Jordan asked.
“Nothing.”
Robert Jordan watched the bend of the road. He knew the wall just below that was too
steep for any one to climb but below it eased and some one might have circled up
above.
If things had been unreal before, they were suddenly real enough now. It was as
though a reflex lens camera had been suddenly brought into focus. It was then he saw
the low-bodied, angled snout and squat green, gray and brown-splashed turret with the
projecting machine gun come around the bend into the bright sun. He fired on it and he
could hear the spang against the steel. The little whippet tank scuttled back behind the
rock wall. Watching the corner, Robert Jordan saw the nose just reappear, then the
edge of the turret showed and the turret swung so that the gun was pointing down the
road.
“It seems like a mouse coming out of his hole,” Agustín said. “Look, Inglés.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway242
“He has little confidence,” Robert Jordan said.
“This is the big insect Pablo has been fighting,” Agustín said. “Hit him again, Inglés.”
“Nay. I cannot hurt him. I don’t want him to see where we are.”
The tank commenced to fire down the road. The bullets hit the road surface and sung
off and now they were pinging and clanging in the iron of the bridge. It was the same
machine gun they had heard below.
“Cabrón!” Agustín said. “Is that the famous tanks, Inglés?”
“That’s a baby one.”
“Cabrón. If I had a baby bottle full of gasoline I would climb up there and set fire to
him. What will he do, Inglés?”
“After a while he will have another look.”
“And these are what men fear,” Agustín said. “Look, Inglés! He’s rekilling the sentries.”
“Since he has no other target,” Robert Jordan said. “Do not reproach him.”
But he was thinking, Sure, make fun of him. But suppose it was you, way back here in
your own country and they held you up with firing on the main road. Then a bridge was
blown. Wouldn’t you think it was mined ahead or that there was a trap? Sure you would.
He’s done all right. He’s waiting for something else to come up. He’s engaging the
enemy. It’s only us. But he can’t tell that. Look at the little bastard.
The little tank had nosed a little farther around the corner.
Just then Agustín saw Pablo coming over the edge of the gorge, pulling himself over
on hands and knees, his bristly face running with sweat.
“Here comes the son of a bitch,” he said.
“Who?”
“Pablo.”
Robert Jordan looked, saw Pablo, and then he commenced firing at the part of the
camouflaged turret of the tank where he knew the slit above the machine gun would be.
The little tank whirred backwards, scuttling out of sight and Robert Jordan picked up the
automatic rifle, clamped the tripod against the barrel and swung the gun with its still hot
muzzle over his shoulder. The muzzle was so hot it burned his shoulder and he shoved
it far behind him turning the stock flat in his hand.
“Bring the sack of pans and my little máquina,” he shouted, “and come running.”
Robert Jordan ran up the hill through the pines. Agustín was close behind him and
behind him Pablo was coming.
“Pilar!” Jordan shouted across the hill. “Come on, woman!”
The three of them were going as fast as they could up the steep slope. They could not
run any more because the grade was too severe and Pablo, who had no load but the
light cavalry submachine gun, had closed up with the other two.
“And thy people?” Agustín said to Pablo out of his dry mouth.
“All dead,” Pablo said. He was almost unable to breathe. Agustín turned his head and
looked at him.
“We have plenty of horses now, Inglés,” Pablo panted.
“Good,” Robert Jordan said. The murderous bastard, he thought. “What did you
encounter?”
“Everything,” Pablo said. He was breathing in lunges. “What passed with Pilar?”
“She lost Fernando and the brother—”
“Eladio,” Agustín said.
“And thou?” Pablo asked.
“I lost Anselmo.”
“There are lots of horses,” Pablo said. “Even for the baggage.”
Agustín bit his lip, looked at Robert Jordan and shook his head. Below them, out of
sight through the trees, they heard the tank firing on the road and bridge again.
Robert Jordan jerked his head. “What passed with that?” he said to Pablo. He did not
like to look at Pablo, nor to smell him, but he wanted to hear him.
“I could not leave with that there,” Pablo said. “We were barricaded at the lower bend
of the post. Finally it went back to look for something and I came.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway243
“What were you shooting at, at the bend?” Agustín asked bluntly.
Pablo looked at him, started to grin, thought better of it, and said nothing.
“Did you shoot them all?” Agustín asked. Robert Jordan was thinking, keep your
mouth shut. It is none of your business now. They have done all that you could expect
and more. This is an intertribal matter. Don’t make moral judgments. What do you
expect from a murderer? You’re working with a murderer. Keep your mouth shut. You
knew enough about him before. This is nothing new. But you dirty bastard, he thought.
You dirty, rotten bastard.
His chest was aching with climbing as though it would split after the running and
ahead now through the trees he saw the horses.
“Go ahead,” Agustín was saying. “Why do you not say you shot them?”
“Shut up,” Pablo said. “I have fought much today and well. Ask the Inglés.”
“And now get us through today,” Robert Jordan said. “For it is thee who has the plan
for this.”
“I have a good plan,” Pablo said. “With a little luck we will be all right.”
He was beginning to breathe better.
“You’re not going to kill any of us, are you?” Agustín said. “For I will kill thee now.”
“Shut up,” Pablo said. “I have to look after thy interest and that of the band. This is
war. One cannot do what one would wish.”
“Cabrón,” said Agustín. “You take all the prizes.”
“Tell me what thou encountered below,” Robert Jordan said to Pablo.
“Everything,” Pablo repeated. He was still breathing as though it were tearing his chest
but he could talk steadily now and his face and head were running with sweat and his
shoulders and chest were soaked with it. He looked at Robert Jordan cautiously to see if
he were really friendly and then he grinned. “Everything,” he said again. “First we took
the post. Then came a motorcyclist. Then another. Then an ambulance. Then a camion.
Then the tank. Just before thou didst the bridge.”
“Then—”
“The tank could not hurt us but we could not leave for it commanded the road. Then it
went away and I came.”
“And thy people?” Agustín put in, still looking for trouble.
“Shut up,” Pablo looked at him squarely, and his face was the face of a man who had
fought well before any other thing had happened. “They were not of our band.”
Now they could see the horses tied to the trees, the sun coming down on them
through the pine branches and them tossing their heads and kicking against the botflies
and Robert Jordan saw Maria and the next thing he was holding her tight, tight, with the
automatic rifle leaning against his side, the flash-cone pressing against his ribs and
Maria saying, “Thou, Roberto. Oh, thou.”
“Yes, rabbit. My good, good rabbit. Now we go.”
“Art thou here truly?”
“Yes. Yes. Truly. Oh, thou!”
He had never thought that you could know that there was a woman if there was battle;
nor that any part of you could know it, or respond to it; nor that if there was a woman
that she should have breasts small, round and tight against you through a shirt; nor that
they, the breasts, could know about the two of them in battle. But it was true and he
thought, good. That’s good. I would not have believed that and he held her to him once
hard, hard, but he did not look at her, and then he slapped her where he never had
slapped her and said, “Mount. Mount. Get on that saddle, guapa.”
Then they were untying the halters and Robert Jordan had given the automatic rifle
back to Agustín and slung his own submachine gun over his back, and he was putting
bombs out of his pockets into the saddlebags, and he stuffed one empty pack inside the
other and tied that one behind his saddle. Then Pilar came up, so breathless from the
climb she could not talk, but only motioned.
Then Pablo stuffed three hobbles he had in his hand into a saddlebag, stood up and
said, “Qué tal, woman?” and she only nodded, and then they were all mounting.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway244
Robert Jordan was on the big gray he had first seen in the snow of the morning of the
day before and he felt that it was much horse between his legs and under his hands. He
was wearing rope-soled shoes and the stirrups were a little too short; his submachine
gun was slung over his shoulder, his pockets were full of clips and he was sitting
reloading the one used clip, the reins under one arm, tight, watching Pilar mount into a
strange sort of seat on top of the duffle lashed onto the saddle of the buckskin.
“Cut that stuff loose for God’s sake,” Primitivo said. “Thou wilt fall and the horse
cannot carry it.”
“Shut up,” said Pilar. “We go to make a life with this.”
“Canst ride like that, woman?” Pablo asked her from the guardia civil saddle on the
great bay horse.
“Like any milk peddler,” Pilar told him. “How do you go, old one?”
“Straight down. Across the road. Up the far slope and into the timber where it
narrows.”
“Across the road?” Agustín wheeled beside him, kicking his soft-heeled, canvas shoes
against the stiff, unresponding belly of one of the horses Pablo had recruited in the
night.
“Yes, man. It is the only way,” Pablo said. He handed him one of the lead ropes.
Primitivo and the gypsy had the others.
“Thou canst come at the end if thou will, Inglés,” Pablo said. “We cross high enough to
be out of range of that máquina. But we will go separately and riding much and then be
together where it narrows above.”
“Good,” said Robert Jordan.
They rode down through the timber toward the edge of the road. Robert Jordan rode
just behind Maria. He could not ride beside her for the timber. He caressed the gray
once with his thigh muscles, and then held him steady as they dropped down fast and
sliding through the pines, telling the gray with his thighs as they dropped down what the
spurs would have told him if they had been on level ground.
“Thou,” he said to Maria, “go second as they cross the road. First is not so bad though
it seems bad. Second is good. It is later that they are always watching for.”
“But thou—”
“I will go suddenly. There will be no problem. It is the places in line that are bad.”
He was watching the round, bristly head of Pablo, sunk in his shoulders as he rode,
his automatic rifle slung over his shoulder. He was watching Pilar, her head bare, her
shoulders broad, her knees higher than her thighs as her heels hooked into the bundles.
She looked back at him once and shook her head.
“Pass the Pilar before you cross the road,” Robert Jordan said to Maria.
Then he was looking through the thinning trees and he saw the oiled dark of the road
below and beyond it the green slope of the hillside. We are above the culvert, he saw,
and just below the height where the road drops down straight toward the bridge in that
long sweep. We are around eight hundred yards above the bridge. That is not out of
range for the Fiat in that little tank if they have come up to the bridge.
“Maria,” he said. “Pass the Pilar before we reach the road and ride wide up that slope.”
She looked back at him but did not say anything. He did not look at her except to see
that she had understood.
“Comprendes?” he asked her.
She nodded.
“Move up,” he said.
She shook her head.
“Move up!”
“Nay,” she told him, turning around and shaking her head. “I go in the order that I am
to go.”
Just then Pablo dug both his spurs into the big bay and he plunged down the last pine-
needled slope and cross the road in a pounding, sparking of shod hooves. The others
came behind him and Robert Jordan saw them crossing the road and slamming on up“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway245
the green slope and heard the machine gun hammer at the bridge. Then he heard a
noise come sweeeish-crack-boom! The boom was a sharp crack that widened in the
cracking and on the hillside he saw a small fountain of earth rise with a plume of gray
smoke. Sweeish-crack-boom! It came again, the swishing like the noise of a rocket and
there was another up-pulsing of dirt and smoke farther up the hillside.
Ahead of him the gypsy was stopped beside the road in the shelter of the last trees.
He looked ahead at the slope and then he looked back toward Robert Jordan.
“Go ahead, Rafael,” Robert Jordan said. “Gallop, man!”
The gypsy was holding the lead rope with the pack-horse pulling his head taut behind
him.
“Drop the pack-horse and gallop!” Robert Jordan said.
He saw the gypsy’s hand extended behind him, rising higher and higher, seeming to
take forever as his heels kicked into the horse he was riding and the rope came taut,
then dropped, and he was across the road and Robert Jordan was kneeing against a
frightened packhorse that bumped back into him as the gypsy crossed the hard, dark
road and he heard his horse’s hooves clumping as he galloped up the slope.
Wheeeeeeish-ca-rack! The flat trajectory of the shell came and he saw the gypsy jink
like a running boar as the earth spouted the little black and gray geyser ahead of him.
He watched him galloping, slow and reaching now, up the long green slope and the gun
threw behind him and ahead of him and he was under the fold of the hill with the others.
I can’t take the damned pack-horse, Robert Jordan thought. Though I wish I could
keep the son of a bitch on my off side. I’d like to have him between me and that 47 mm.
they’re throwing with. By God, I’ll try to get him up there anyway.
He rode up to the pack-horse, caught hold of the hackamore, and then, holding the
rope, the horse trotting behind him, rode fifty yards up through the trees. At the edge of
the trees he looked down the road past the truck to the bridge. He could see men out on
the bridge and behind it looked like a traffic jam on the road. Robert Jordan looked
around, saw what he wanted finally and reached up and broke a dead limb from a pine
tree. He dropped the hackamore, edged the pack-horse up to the slope that slanted
down to the road and then hit him hard across the rump with the tree branch. “Go on,
you son of a bitch,” he said, and threw the dead branch after him as the pack-horse
crossed the road and started across the slope. The branch hit him and the horse broke
from a run into a gallop.
Robert Jordan rode thirty yards farther up the road; beyond that the bank was too
steep. The gun was firing now with the rocket whish and the cracking, dirt-spouting
boom. “Come on, you big gray fascist bastard,” Robert Jordan said to the horse and put
him down the slope in a sliding plunge. Then he was out in the open, over the road that
was so hard under the hooves he felt the pound of it come up all the way to his
shoulders, his neck and his teeth, onto the smooth of the slope, the hooves finding it,
cutting it, pounding it, reaching, throwing, going, and he looked down across the slope to
where the bridge showed now at a new angle he had never seen. It crossed in profile
now without foreshortening and in the center was the broken place and behind it on the
road was the little tank and behind the little tank was a big tank with a gun that flashed
now yellow-bright as a mirror and the screech as the air ripped apart seemed almost
over the gray neck that stretched ahead of him, and he turned his head as the dirt
fountained up the hillside. The pack-horse was ahead of him swinging too far to the right
and slowing down and Robert Jordan, galloping, his head turned a little toward the
bridge, saw the line of trucks halted behind the turn that showed now clearly as he was
gaining height, and he saw the bright yellow flash that signalled the instant whish and
boom, and the shell fell short, but he heard the metal sailing from where the dirt rose.
He saw them all ahead in the edge of the timber watching him and he said, “Arre
caballo! Go on, horse!” and felt his big horse’s chest surging with the steepening of the
slope and saw the gray neck stretching and the gray ears ahead and he reached and
patted the wet gray neck, and he looked back at the bridge and saw the bright flash from
the heavy, squat, mud-colored tank there on the road and then he did not hear any“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway246
whish but only a banging acrid smelling clang like a boiler being ripped apart and he
was under the gray horse and the gray horse was kicking and he was trying to pull out
from under the weight.
He could move all right. He could move toward the right. But his left leg stayed
perfectly flat under the horse as he moved to the right. It was as though there was a new
joint in it; not the hip joint but another one that went sideways like a hinge. Then he
knew what it was all right and just then the gray horse knee-ed himself up and Robert
Jordan’s right leg, that had kicked the stirrup loose just as it should, slipped clear over
the saddle and came down beside him and he felt with his two hands of his thigh bone
where the left leg lay flat against the ground and his hands both felt the sharp bone and
where it pressed against the skin.
The gray horse was standing almost over him and he could see his ribs heaving. The
grass was green where he sat and there were meadow flowers in it and he looked down
the slope across to the road and the bridge and the gorge and the road and saw the
tank and waited for the next flash. It came almost at once with again no whish and in the
burst of it, with the smell of the high explosive, the dirt clods scattering and the steel
whirring off, he saw the big gray horse sit quietly down beside him as though it were a
horse in a circus. And then, looking at the horse sitting there, he heard the sound the
horse was making.
Then Primitivo and Agustín had him under the armpits and were dragging him up the
last slope and the new joint in his leg let it swing any way the ground swung it. Once a
shell whished close over them and they dropped him and fell flat, but the dirt scattered
over them and and the metal sung off and they picked him up again. And then they had
him up to the shelter of the long draw in the timber where the horses were, and Maria,
Pilar and Pablo were standing over him.
Maria was kneeling by him and saying, “Roberto, what hast thou?”
He said, sweating heavily, “The left leg is broken, guapa.”
“We will bind it up,” Pilar said. “Thou canst ride that.” She pointed to one of the horses
that was packed. “Cut off the load.”
Robert Jordan saw Pablo shake his head and he nodded at him.
“Get along,” he said. Then he said, “Listen, Pablo. Come here.”
The sweat-streaked, bristly face bent down by him and Robert Jordan smelt the full
smell of Pablo.
“Let us speak,” he said to Pilar and Maria. “I have to speak to Pablo.”
“Does it hurt much?” Pablo asked. He was bending close over Robert Jordan.
“No. I think the nerve is crushed. Listen. Get along. I am mucked, see? I will talk to the
girl for a moment. When I say to take her, take her. She will want to stay. I will only
speak to her for a moment.”
“Clearly, there is not much time,” Pablo said.
“Clearly.”
“I think you would do better in the Republic,” Robert Jordan said.
“Nay. I am for Gredos.”
“Use thy head.”
“Talk to her now,” Pablo said. “There is little time. I am sorry thou hast this, Inglés.”
“Since I have it—” Robert Jordan said. “Let us not speak of it. But use thy head. Thou
hast much head. Use it.”
“Why would I not?” said Pablo. “Talk now fast, Inglés. There is no time.”
Pablo went over to the nearest tree and watched down the slope, across the slope
and up the road across the gorge. Pablo was looking at the gray horse on the slope with
true regret on his face and Pilar and Maria were with Robert Jordan where he sat
against the tree trunk.
“Slit the trouser, will thee?” he said to Pilar. Maria crouched by him and did not speak.
The sun was on her hair and her face was twisted as a child’s contorts before it cries.
But she was not crying.
Pilar took her knife and slit his trouser leg down below the lefthand pocket. Robert“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway247
Jordan spread the cloth with his hands and looked at the stretch of his thigh. Ten inches
below the hip joint there was a pointed, purple swelling like a sharp-peaked little tent
and as he touched it with his fingers he could feel the snapped-off thigh bone tight
against the skin. His leg was lying at an odd angle. He looked up at Pilar. Her face had
the same expression as Maria’s.
“Anda,” he said to her. “Go.”
She went away with her head down without saying anything nor looking back and
Robert Jordan could see her shoulders shaking.
“Guapa,” he said to Maria and took hold of her two hands. “Listen. We will not be
going to Madrid—”
Then she started to cry.
“No, guapa, don’t,” he said. “Listen. We will not go to Madrid now but I go always with
thee wherever thou goest. Understand?”
She said nothing and pushed her head against his cheek with her arms around him.
“Listen to this well, rabbit,” he said. He knew there was a great hurry and he was
sweating very much, but this had to be said and understood. “Thou wilt go now, rabbit.
But I go with thee. As long as there is one of us there is both of us. Do you understand?”
“Nay, I stay with thee.”
“Nay, rabbit. What I do now I do alone. I could not do it well with thee. If thou goest
then I go, too. Do you not see how it is? Whichever one there is, is both.”
“I will stay with thee.”
“Nay, rabbit. Listen. That people cannot do together. Each one must do it alone. But if
thou goest then I go with thee. It is in that way that I go too. Thou wilt go now, I know.
For thou art good and kind. Thou wilt go now for us both.”
“But it is easier if I stay with thee,” she said. “It is better for me.”
“Yes. Therefore go for a favor. Do it for me since it is what thou canst do.”
“But you don’t understand, Roberto. What about me? It is worse for me to go.”
“Surely,” he said. “It is harder for thee. But I am thee also now.”
She said nothing.
He looked at her and he was sweating heavily and he spoke now, trying harder to do
something than he had ever tried in all his life.
“Now you will go for us both,” he said. “You must not be selfish, rabbit. You must do
your duty now.”
She shook her head.
“You are me now,” he said. “Surely thou must feel it, rabbit.
“Rabbit, listen,” he said. “Truly thus I go too. I swear it to thee.”
She said nothing.
“Now you see it,” he said. “Now I see it is clear. Now thou wilt go. Good. Now you are
going. Now you have said you will go.”
She had said nothing.
“Now I thank thee for it. Now you are going well and fast and far and we both go in
thee. Now put thy hand here. Now put thy head down. Nay, put it down. That is right.
Now I put my hand there. Good. Thou art so good. Now do not think more. Now art thou
doing what thou should. Now thou art obeying. Not me but us both. The me in thee. Now
you go for us both. Truly. We both go in thee now. This I have promised thee. Thou art
very good to go and very kind.”
He jerked his head at Pablo, who was half-looking at him from the tree and Pablo
started over. He motioned with his thumb to Pilar.
“We will go to Madrid another time, rabbit,” he said. “Truly. Now stand up and go and
we both go. Stand up. See?”
“No,” she said and held him tight around the neck.
He spoke now still calmly and reasonably but with great authority.
“Stand up,” he said. “Thou art me too now. Thou art all there will be of me. Stand up.”
She stood up slowly, crying, and with her head down. Then she dropped quickly
beside him and then stood up again, slowly and tiredly, as he said, “Stand up, guapa.”“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway248
Pilar was holding her by the arm and she was standing there.
“Vamonos,” Pilar said. “Dost lack anything, Inglés?” She looked at him and shook her
head.
“No,” he said and went on talking to Maria.
“There is no good-by, guapa, because we are not apart. That it should be good in the
Gredos. Go now. Go good. Nay,” he spoke now still calmly and reasonably as Pilar
walked the girl along. “Do not turn around. Put thy foot in. Yes. Thy foot in. Help her up,”
he said to Pilar. “Get her in the saddle. Swing up now.”
He turned his head, sweating, and looked down the slope, then back toward where the
girl was in the saddle with Pilar by her and Pablo just behind. “Now go,” he said. “Go.”
She started to look around. “Don’t look around,” Robert Jordan said. “Go.” And Pablo
hit the horse across the crupper with a hobbling strap and it looked as though Maria
tried to slip from the saddle but Pilar and Pablo were riding close up against her and
Pilar was holding her and the three horses were going up the draw.
“Roberto,” Maria turned and shouted. “Let me stay! Let me stay!”
“I am with thee,” Robert Jordan shouted. “I am with thee now. We are both there. Go!”
Then they were out of sight around the corner of the draw and he was soaking wet with
sweat and looking at nothing.
Agustín was standing by him.
“Do you want me to shoot thee, Inglés?” he asked, leaning down close. “Quieres? It is
nothing.”
“No hace falta,” Robert Jordan said. “Get along. I am very well here.”
“Me cago en la leche que me han dado!” Agustín said. He was crying so he could not
see Robert Jordan clearly. “Salud, Inglés.”
“Salud, old one,” Robert Jordan said. He was looking down the slope now. “Look well
after the cropped head, wilt thou?”
“There is no problem,” Agustín said. “Thou has what thou needest?”
“There are very few shells for this máquina, so I will keep it,” Robert Jordan said.
“Thou canst now get more. For that other and the one of Pablo, yes.”
“I cleaned out the barrel,” Agustín said. “Where thou plugged it in the dirt with the fall.”
“What became of the pack-horse?”
“The gypsy caught it.”
Agustín was on the horse now but he did not want to go. He leaned far over toward
the tree where Robert Jordan lay.
“Go on, viejo,” Robert Jordan said to him. “In war there are many things like this.”
“Qué puta es Ia guerra,” Agustín said. “War is a bitchery.”
“Yes, man, yes. But get on with thee.”
“Salud, Inglés,” Agustín said, clenching his right fist.
“Salud,” Robert Jordan said. “But get along, man.”
Agustín wheeled his horse and brought his right fist down as though he cursed again
with the motion of it and rode up the draw. All the others had been out of sight long
before. He looked back where the draw turned in the timber and waved his fist. Robert
Jordan waved and then Agustín, too, was out of sight.. . . Robert Jordan looked down
the green slope of the hillside to the road and the bridge. I’m as well this way as any, he
thought. It wouldn’t be worth risking getting over on my belly yet, not as close as that
thing was to the surface, and I can see better this way.
He felt empty and drained and exhausted from all of it and from them going and his
mouth tasted of bile. Now, finally and at last, there was no problem. however all of it had
been and however all of it would ever be now, for him, no longer was there any problem.
They were all gone now and he was alone with his back against a tree. He looked
down across the green slope, seeing the gray horse where Agustín had shot him, and
on down the slope to the road with the timber-covered country behind it. Then he looked
at the bridge and across the bridge and watched the activity on the bridge and the road.
He could see the trucks now, all down the lower road. The gray of the trucks showed
through the trees. Then he looked back up the road to where it came down over the hill.“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway249
They will be coming soon now, he thought.
Pilar will take care of her as well as any one can. You know that. Pablo must have a
sound plan or he would not have tried it. You do not have to worry about Pablo. It does
no good to think about Maria. Try to believe what you told her. That is the best. And who
says it is not true? Not you. You don’t say it, any more than you would say the things did
not happen that happened. Stay with what you believe now. Don’t get cynical. The time
is too short and you have just sent her away. Each one does what he can. You can do
nothing for yourself but perhaps you can do something for another. Well, we had all our
luck in four days. Not four days. It was afternoon when I first got there and it will not be
noon today. That makes not quite three days and three nights. Keep it accurate, he said.
Quite accurate.
I think you better get down now, he thought. You better get fixed around some way
where you will be useful instead of leaning against this tree like a tramp. You have had
much luck. There are many worse things than this. Every one has to do this, one day or
another. You are not afraid of it once you know you have to do it, are you? No, he said,
truly. It was lucky the nerve was crushed, though. I cannot even feel that there is
anything below the break. He touched the lower part of his leg and it was as though it
were not part of his body.
He looked down the hill slope again and he thought, I hate to leave it, is all. I hate to
leave it very much and I hope I have done some good in it. I have tried to with what
talent I had. Have, you mean. All right, have.
I have fought for what I believed in for a year now. If we win here we will win
everywhere. The world is a fine place and worth the fighting for and I hate very much to
leave it. And you had a lot of luck, he told himself, to have had such a good life. You’ve
had just as good a life as grandfather’s though not as long. You’ve had as good a life as
any one because of these last days. You do not want to complain when you have been
so lucky. I wish there was some way to pass on what I’ve learned, though. Christ, I was
learning fast there at the end. I’d like to talk to Karkov. That is in Madrid. Just over the
hills there, and down across the plain. Down out of the gray rocks and the pines, the
heather and the gorse, across the yellow high plateau you see it rising white and
beautiful. That part is just as true as Pilar’s old women drinking the blood down at the
slaughterhouse. There’s no one thing that’s true. It’s all true. The way the planes are
beautiful whether they are ours or theirs. The hell they are, he thought.
You take it easy, now, he said. Get turned over now while you still have time. Listen,
one thing. Do you remember? Pilar and the hand? Do you believe that crap? No, he
said. Not with everything that’s happened? No, I don’t believe it. She was nice about it
early this morning before the show started. She was afraid maybe I believed it. I don’t,
though. But she does. They see something. Or they feel something. Like a bird dog.
What about extra-sensory perception? What about obscenity? he said. She wouldn’t say
good-by, he thought, because she knew if she did Maria would never go. That Pilar. Get
yourself turned over, Jordan. But he was reluctant to try it.
Then he remembered that he had the small flask in his hip pocket and he thought, I’ll
take a good spot of the giant killer and then I’ll try it. But the flask was not there when he
felt for it. Then he felt that much more alone because he knew there was not going to be
even that. I guess I’d counted on that, he said.
Do you suppose Pablo took it? Don’t be silly. You must have lost it at the bridge.
“Come on now, Jordan,” he said. “Over you go.”
Then he took hold of his left leg with both hands and pulled on it hard, pulling toward
the foot while he lay down beside the tree he had been resting his back against. Then
lying flat and pulling hard on the leg, so the broken end of the bone would not come up
and cut through the thigh, he turned slowly around on his rump until the back of his head
was facing downhill. Then with his broken leg, held by both hands, uphill, he put the sole
of his right foot against the instep of his left foot and pressed hard while he rolled,
sweating, over onto his face and chest. He got onto his elbows, stretched the left leg
well behind him with both hands and a far, sweating, push with the right foot and there“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway250
he was. He felt with his fingers on the left thigh and it was all right. The bone end had
not punctured the skin and the broken end was well into the muscle now.
The big nerve must have been truly smashed when that damned horse rolled on it, he
thought. It truly doesn’t hurt at all. Except now in certain changes of positions. That’s
when the bone pinches something else. You see? he said. You see what luck is? You
didn’t need the giant killer at all.
He reached over for the submachine gun, took the clip out that was in the magazine,
felt in his pocket for clips, opened the action and looked through the barrel, put the clip
back into the groove of the magazine until it clicked, and then looked down the hill slope.
Maybe half an hour, he thought. Now take it easy.
Then he looked at the hillside and he looked at the pines and he tried not to think at
all.
Then he looked at the stream and he remembered how it had been under the bridge in
the cool of the shadow. I wish they would come, he thought. I do not want to get in any
sort of mixed-up state before they come.
Who do you suppose has it easier? Ones with religion or just taking it straight? It
comforts them very much but we know there is no thing to fear. It is only missing it that’s
bad. Dying is only bad when it takes a long time and hurts so much that it humiliates
you. That is where you have all the luck, see? You don’t have any of that.
It’s wonderful they’ve got away. I don’t mind this at all now they are away. It is sort of
the way I said. It is really very much that way. Look how different it would be if they were
all scattered out across that hill where that gray horse is. Or if we were all cooped up
here waiting for it. No. They’re gone. They’re away. Now if the attack were only a
success. What do you want? Everything. I want everything and I will take whatever I get.
If this attack is no good another one will be. I never noticed when the planes came back.
God, that was lucky I could make her go.
I’d like to tell grandfather about this one. I’ll bet he never had to go over and find his
people and do a show like this. How do you know? He may have done fifty. No, he said.
Be accurate. Nobody did any fifty like this one. Nobody did five. Nobody did one maybe
not just like this. Sure. They must have.
I wish they would come now, he said. I wish they would come right now because the
leg is starting to hurt now. It must be the swelling.
We were going awfully good when that thing hit us, he thought. But it was only luck it
didn’t come while I was under the bridge. When a thing is wrong something’s bound to
happen. You were bitched when they gave Golz those orders. That was what you knew
and it was probably that which Pilar felt. But later on we will have these things much
better organized. We ought to have portable short wave transmitters. Yes, there’s a lot
of things we ought to have. I ought to carry a spare leg, too.
He grinned at that sweatily because the leg, where the big nerve had been bruised by
the fall, was hurting badly now. Oh, let them come, he said. I don’t want to do that
business that my father did. I will do it all right but I’d much prefer not to have to. I’m
against that. Don’t think about that. Don’t think at all. I wish the bastards would come, he
said. I wish so very much they’d come.
His leg was hurting very badly now. The pain had started suddenly with the swelling
after he had moved and he said, Maybe I’ll just do it now. I guess I’m not awfully good at
pain. Listen, if I do that now you wouldn’t misunderstand, would you? Who are you
talking to? Nobody, he said. Grandfather, I guess. No. Nobody. Oh bloody it, I wish that
they would come.
Listen, I may have to do that because if I pass out or anything like that I am no good at
all and if they bring me to they will ask me a lot of questions and do things and all and
that is no good. It’s much best not to have them do those things. So why wouldn’t it be
all right to just do it now and then the whole thing would be over with? Because oh,
listen, yes, listen, let them come now.
You’re not good at this, Jordan, he said. Not so good at this. And who is so good at
this? I don’t know and I don’t really care right now. But you are not. That’s right. You’re“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway251
not at all. Oh not at all, at all. I think it would be all right to do it now? Don’t you?
No, it isn’t. Because there is something you can do yet. As long as you know what it is
you have to do it. As long as you remember what it is you have to wait for that. Come
on. Let them come. Let them come. Let them come!
Think about them being away, he said. Think about them going through the timber.
Think about them crossing a creek. Think about them riding through the heather. Think
about them going up the slope. Think about them O.K. tonight. Think about them
travelling, all night. Think about them hiding up tomorrow. Think about them. God damn
it, think about them. That’s just as far as I can think about them, he said.
Think about Montana. I can’t. Think about Madrid. I can’t. Think about a cool drink of
water. All right. That’s what it will be like. Like a cool drink of water. You’re a liar. It will
just be nothing. That’s all it will be. Just nothing. Then do it. Do it. Do it now. It’s all right
to do it now. Go on and do it now. No, you have to wait. What for? You know all right.
Then wait.
I can’t wait any longer now, he said. If I wait any longer I’ll pass out. I know because
I’ve felt it starting to go three times now and I’ve held it. I held it all right. But I don’t know
about any more. What I think is you’ve got an internal hemorrhage there from where that
thigh bone’s cut around inside. Especially on that turning business. That makes the
swelling and that’s what weakens you and makes you start to pass. It would be all right
to do it now. Really, I’m telling you that it would be all right.
And if you wait and hold them up even a little while or just get the officer that may
make all the difference. One thing well done can make—
All right, he said. And he lay very quietly and tried to hold on to himself that he felt
slipping away from himself as you feel snow starting to slip sometimes on a mountain
slope, and he said, now quietly, then let me last until they come.
Robert Jordan’s luck held very good because he saw, just then, the cavalry ride out of
the timber and cross the road. He watched them coming riding up the slope. He saw the
trooper who stopped by the gray horse and shouted to the officer who rode over to him.
He watched them both looking down at the gray horse. They recognized him of course.
He and his rider had been missing since the early morning of the day before.
Robert Jordan saw them there on the slope, close to him now, and below he saw the
road and the bridge and the long lines of vehicles below it. He was completely
integrated now and he took a good long look at everything. Then he looked up at the
sky. There were big white clouds in it. He touched the palm of his hand against the pine
needles where he lay and he touched the bark of the pine trunk that he lay behind.
Then he rested easily as he could with his two elbows in the pine needles and the
muzzle of the submachine gun resting against the trunk of the pine tree.
As the officer came trotting now on the trail of the horses of the band he would pass
twenty yards below where Robert Jordan lay. At that distance there would be no
problem. The officer was Lieutenant Berrendo. He had come up from La Granja when
they had been ordered up after the first report of the attack on the lower post. They had
ridden hard and had then had to swing back, because the bridge had been blown, to
cross the gorge high above and come around through the timber. Their horses were wet
and blown and they had to be urged into the trot.
Lieutenant Berrendo, watching the trail, came riding up, his thin face serious and
grave. His submachine gun lay across his saddle in the crook of his left arm. Robert
Jordan lay behind the tree, holding onto himself very carefully and delicately to keep his
hands steady. He was waiting until the officer reached the sunlit place where the first
trees of the pine forest joined the green slope of the meadow. He could feel his heart
beating against the pine needle floor of the forest.
The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
The Old Man and the Sea
By Ernest Hemingway
www.Asiaing.com
To Charlie Shribner
And
To Max Perkins
He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he had gone
eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In the first forty days a boy had been with him.
But after forty days without a fish the boy’s parents had told him that the old man was
now definitely and finally salao, which is the worst form of unlucky, and the boy had gone
at their orders in another boat which caught three good fish the first week. It made the
boy sad to see the old man come in each day with his skiff empty and he always went
down to help him carry either the coiled lines or the gaff and harpoon and the sail that
was furled around the mast. The sail was patched with flour sacks and, furled, it looked
like the flag of permanent defeat.
The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the back of his neck. The
brown blotches of the benevolent skin cancer the sun brings from its [9] reflection on the
tropic sea were on his cheeks. The blotches ran well down the sides of his face and his
hands had the deep-creased scars from handling heavy fish on the cords. But none of
these scars were fresh. They were as old as erosions in a fishless desert.
Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same color as the
sea and were cheerful and undefeated.
“Santiago,” the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the skiff was
hauled up. “I could go with you again. We’ve made some money.”
The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy loved him.
“No,” the old man said. “You’re with a lucky boat. Stay with them.”
“But remember how you went eighty-seven days without fish and then we caught big
ones every day for three weeks.”
-1-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“I remember,” the old man said. “I know you did not leave me because you doubted.”
“It was papa made me leave. I am a boy and I must obey him.”
“I know,” the old man said. “It is quite normal.”
“He hasn’t much faith.”
[10] “No,” the old man said. “But we have. Haven’t we?”
“Yes,” the boy said. “Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then we’ll take the stuff
home.”
“Why not?” the old man said. “Between fishermen.”
They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen made fun of the old man and he
was noteangry. Others, of the older fishermen, looked at him and were sad. But they did
not show it and they spoke politely about the current and the depths they had drifted
their lines at and the steady good weather and of what they had seen. The successful
fishermen of that day were already in and had butchered their marlin out and carried
them laid full length across two planks, with two men staggering at the end of each plank,
to the fish house where they waited for the ice truck to carry them to the market in
Havana. Those who had caught sharks had taken them to the shark factory on the other
side of the cove where they were hoisted on a block and tackle, their livers removed, their
fins cut off and their hides skinned out and their flesh cut into strips for salting.
When the wind was in the east a smell came across the harbour from the shark
factory; but today there [11] was only the faint edge of the odour because the wind had
backed into the north and then dropped off and it was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace.
“Santiago,” the boy said.
“Yes,” the old man said. He was holding his glass and thinking of many years ago.
“Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow?”
“No. Go and play baseball. I can still row and Rogelio will throw the net.”
“I would like to go. If I cannot fish with you. I would like to serve in some way.”
“You bought me a beer,” the old man said. “You are already a man.”
“How old was I when you first took me in a boat?”
“Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green and he nearly
tore the boat to pieces. Can you remember?”
“I can remember the tail slapping and banging and the thwart breaking and the
noise of the clubbing. I can remember you throwing me into the bow where the wet coiled
lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver and the noise of you clubbing him like
chopping a tree down and the sweet blood smell all over me.”
[12] “Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you?”
-2-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“I remember everything from when we first went together.”
The old man looked at him with his sun-burned, confident loving eyes.
“If you were my boy I’d take you out and gamble,” he said. “But you are your father’s
and your mother’s and you are in a lucky boat.”
“May I get the sardines? I know where I can get four baits too.”
“I have mine left from today. I put them in salt in the box.”
“Let me get four fresh ones.”
“One,” the old man said. His hope and his confidence had never gone. But now they
were freshening as when the breeze rises.
“Two,” the boy said.
“Two,” the old man agreed. “You didn’t steal them?”
“I would,” the boy said. “But I bought these.”
“Thank you,” the old man said. He was too simple to wonder when he had attained
humility. But he [13] knew he had attained it and he knew it was not disgraceful and it
carried no loss of true pride.
“Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this current,” he said.
“Where are you going?” the boy asked.
“Far out to come in when the wind shifts. I want to be out before it is light.”
“I’ll try to get him to work far out,” the boy said. “Then if you hook something truly
big we can come to your aid.”
“He does not like to work too far out.”
“No,” the boy said. “But I will see something that he cannot see such as a bird
working and get
him to come out after dolphin.” “Are his eyes that bad?” “He is almost blind.” “It is
strange,” the old man said. “He never went turtle-ing. That is what kills the eyes.” “But
you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito Coast and your eyes are good.”
“I am a strange old man”
“But are you strong enough now for a truly big fish?”
“I think so. And there are many tricks.”
[14] “Let us take the stuff home,” the boy said. “So I can get the cast net and go after
the sardines.”
They picked up the gear from the boat. The old man carried the mast on his shoulder
-3-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
and the boy carried the wooden boat with the coiled, hard-braided brown lines, the gaff
and the harpoon with its shaft. The box with the baits was under the stern of the skiff
along with the club that was used to subdue the big fish when they were brought
alongside. No one would steal from the old man but it was better to take the sail and the
heavy lines home as the dew was bad for them and, though he was quite sure no local
people would steal from him, the old man thought that a gaff and a harpoon were
needless temptations to leave in a boat.
They walked up the road together to the old man’s shack and went in through its
open door. The old man leaned the mast with its wrapped sail against the wall and the
boy put the box and the other gear beside it. The mast was nearly as long as the one room
of the shack. The shack was made of the tough budshields of the royal palm which are
called guano and in it there was a bed, a table, one chair, and a place on the dirt floor to
cook with charcoal. On the brown walls of the flattened, overlapping leaves of the sturdy
fibered [15] guano there was a picture in color of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and another
of the Virgin of Cobre. These were relics of his wife. Once there had been a tinted
photograph of his wife on the wall but he had taken it down because it made him too
lonely to see it and it was on the shelf in the corner under his clean shirt.
“What do you have to eat?” the boy asked.
“A pot of yellow rice with fish. Do you want some?”
“No. I will eat at home. Do you want me to make the fire?”
“No. I will make it later on. Or I may eat the rice cold.”
“May I take the cast net?”
“Of course.”
There was no cast net and the boy remembered when they had sold it. But they went
through
this fiction every day. There was no pot of yellow rice and fish and the boy knew this
too. “Eighty-five is a lucky number,” the old man said. “How would you like to see me
bring one in that dressed out over a thousand pounds?” “I’ll get the cast net and go for
sardines. Will you sit in the sun in the doorway?”
[16] “Yes. I have yesterday’s paper and I will read the baseball.” The boy did not
know whether yesterday’s paper was a fiction too. But the old man brought it out from
under the bed.
“Perico gave it to me at the bodega,” he explained. “I’ll be back when I have the
sardines. I’ll keep yours and mine together on ice and we can share them in the morning.
When I come back you can tell me about the baseball.”
“The Yankees cannot lose.”
“But I fear the Indians of Cleveland.”
-4-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“Have faith in the Yankees my son. Think of the great DiMaggio.”
“I fear both the Tigers of Detroit and the Indians of Cleveland.”
“Be careful or you will fear even the Reds of Cincinnati and the White Sax of
Chicago.”
“You study it and tell me when I come back.”
“Do you think we should buy a terminal of the lottery with an eighty-five? Tomorrow
is the
eighty-fifth day.” “We can do that,” the boy said. “But what about the eighty-seven of
your great record?”
[17] “It could not happen twice. Do you think you can find an eighty-five?”
“I can order one.
“One sheet. That’s two dollars and a half. Who can we borrow that from?”
“That’s easy. I can always borrow two dollars and a half.”
“I think perhaps I can too. But I try not to borrow. First you borrow. Then you beg.”
“Keep warm old man,” the boy said. “Remember we are in September.”
“The month when the great fish come,” the old man said. “Anyone can be a
fisherman in May.”
“I go now for the sardines,” the boy said.
When the boy came back the old man was asleep in the chair and the sun was down.
The boy took the old army blanket off the bed and spread it over the back of the chair and
over the old man’s shoulders. They were strange shoulders, still powerful although very
old, and the neck was still strong too and the creases did not show so much when the old
man was asleep and his head fallen forward. His shirt had been patched so many times
that it was like the sail and the patches were faded to many different shades by the sun.
The [18] old man’s head was very old though and with his eyes closed there was no life in
his face. The newspaper lay across his knees and the weight of his arm held it there in the
evening breeze. He was barefooted.
The boy left him there and when he came back the old man was still asleep.
“Wake up old man,” the boy said and put his hand on one of the old man’s knees.
The old man opened his eyes and for a moment he was coming back from a long way
away. Then he smiled.
“What have you got?” he asked.
“Supper,” said the boy. “We’re going to have supper.”
-5-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“I’m not very hungry.”
“Come on and eat. You can’t fish and not eat.”
“I have,” the old man said getting up and taking the newspaper and folding it. Then
he started to fold the blanket.
“Keep the blanket around you,” the boy said. “You’ll not fish without eating while I’m
alive.”
“Then live a long time and take care of yourself,” the old man said. “What are we
eating?”
“Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some stew.”
[19] The boy had brought them in a two-decker metal container from the Terrace.
The two sets of knives and forks and spoons were in his pocket with a paper napkin
wrapped around each set.
“Who gave this to you?”
“Martin. The owner.”
“I must thank him.”
“I thanked him already,” the boy said. “You don’t need to thank him.”
“I’ll give him the belly meat of a big fish,” the old man said. “Has he done this for us
more than once?”
“I think so.”
“I must give him something more than the belly meat then. He is very thoughtful for
us.”
“He sent two beers.”
“I like the beer in cans best.”
“I know. But this is in bottles, Hatuey beer, and I take back the bottles.”
“That’s very kind of you,” the old man said. “Should we eat?”
“I’ve been asking you to,” the boy told him gently. “I have not wished to open the
container until you were ready.”
[20] “I’m ready now,” the old man said. “I only needed time to wash.”
Where did you wash? the boy thought. The village water supply was two streets
down the road. I must have water here for him, the boy thought, and soap and a good
towel. Why am I so thoughtless? I must get him another shirt and a jacket for the winter
and some sort of shoes and another blanket.
-6-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“Your stew is excellent,” the old man said.
“Tell me about the baseball,” the boy asked him.
“In the American League it is the Yankees as I said,” the old man said happily.”
“They lost today,” the boy told him.
“That means nothing. The great DiMaggio is himself again.”
“They have other men on the team.”
“Naturally. But he makes the difference. In the other league, between Brooklyn and
Philadelphia I must take Brooklyn. But then I think of Dick Sisler and those great drives
In the old park.”
“There was nothing ever like them. He hits the longest ball I have ever seen.”
“Do you remember when he used to come to the Terrace?”
[21] “I wanted to take him fishing but I was too timid to ask him. Then I asked you to
ask him and you were too timid.” “I know. It was a great mistake. He might have gone
with us. Then we would have that for all of our lives.” “I would like to take the great
DiMaggio fishing,” the old man said. “They say his father was a fisherman. Maybe he was
as poor as we are and would understand.” “The great Sisler’s father was never poor and
he, the father, was playing in the Big Leagues when he was my age.” “When I was your
age I was before the mast on a square rigged ship that ran to Africa and I
have seen lions on the beaches in the evening.”
“I know. You told me.”
“Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?”
“Baseball I think,” the boy said. “Tell me about the great John J. McGraw.” He said
Jota for J.
“He used to come to the Terrace sometimes too in the older days. But he was rough
and harsh-spoken and difficult when he was drinking. His mind was on horses as well as
baseball. At least he carried lists of [22] horses at all times in his pocket and frequently
spoke the names of horses on the telephone.”
“He was a great manager,” the boy said. “My father thinks he was the greatest.”
“Because he came here the most times,” the old man said. “If Durocher had
continued to come here each year your father would think him the greatest manager.”
“Who is the greatest manager, really, Luque or Mike Gonzalez?”
“I think they are equal.”
“And the best fisherman is you.”
-7-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“No. I know others better.”
“Que Va,” the boy said. “There are many good fishermen and some great ones. But
there is only you.”
“Thank you. You make me happy. I hope no fish will come along so great that he will
prove us wrong.”
“There is no such fish if you are still strong as you say.”
“I may not be as strong as I think,” the old man said. “But I know many tricks and I
have resolution.” “You ought to go to bed now so that you will be fresh in the morning. I
will take the things back to the Terrace.”
[23] “Good night then. I will wake you in the morning.”
“You’re my alarm clock,” the boy said.
“Age is my alarm clock,” the old man said. “Why do old men wake so early? Is it to
have one longer day?”
“I don’t know,” the boy said. “All I know is that young boys sleep late and hard.”
“I can remember it,” the old man said. “I’ll waken you in time.”
“I do not like for him to waken me. It is as though I were inferior.”
“I know.”
“Sleep well old man.”
The boy went out. They had eaten with no light on the table and the old man took off
his trousers and went to bed in the dark. He rolled his trousers up to make a pillow,
putting the newspaper inside them. He rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the
other old newspapers that covered the springs of the bed.
He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa when he was a boy and the
long golden beaches and the white beaches, so white they hurt your eyes, and the high
capes and the great brown mountains. He lived along that coast now every night and in
his dreams he heard the surf roar and saw the native boats [24] come riding through it.
He smelled the tar and oakum of the deck as he slept and he smelled the smell of Africa
that the land breeze brought at morning.
Usually when he smelled the land breeze he woke up and dressed to go and wake the
boy. But tonight the smell of the land breeze came very early and he knew it was too early
in his dream and went on dreaming to see the white peaks of the Islands rising from the
sea and then he dreamed of the different harbours and roadsteads of the Canary Islands.
He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of women, nor of great occurrences, nor of
great fish, nor fights, nor contests of strength, nor of his wife. He only dreamed of places
now and of the lions on the beach. They played like young cats in the dusk and he loved
them as he loved the boy. He never dreamed about the boy. He simply woke, looked out
the open door at the moon and unrolled his trousers and put them on. He urinated
-8-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
outside the shack and then went up the road to wake the boy. He was shivering with the
morning cold. But he knew he would shiver himself warm and that soon he would be
rowing.
The door of the house where the boy lived was unlocked and he opened it and
walked in quietly with his [25] bare feet. The boy was asleep on a cot in the first room and
the old man could see him clearly with the light that came in from the dying moon. He
took hold of one foot gently and held it until the boy woke and turned and looked at him.
The old man nodded and the boy took his trousers from the chair by the bed and, sitting
on the bed, pulled them on.
The old man went out the door and the boy came after him. He was sleepy and the
old man put his arm across his shoulders and said, “I am sorry.”
“Qua Va,” the boy said. “It is what a man must do.”
They walked down the road to the old man’s shack and all along the road, in the dark,
barefoot men were moving, carrying the masts of their boats.
When they reached the old man’s shack the boy took the rolls of line in the basket
and the harpoon and gaff and the old man carried the mast with the furled sail on his
shoulder.
“Do you want coffee?” the boy asked.
“We’ll put the gear in the boat and then get some.”
They had coffee from condensed milk cans at an early morning place that served
fishermen.
“How did you sleep old man?” the boy asked. He [26] was waking up now although it
was still hard for him to leave his sleep.
“Very well, Manolin,” the old man said. “I feel confident today.”
“So do I,” the boy said. “Now I must get your sardines and mine and your fresh baits.
He brings our gear himself. He never wants anyone to carry anything.”
“We’re different,” the old man said. “I let you carry things when you were five years
old.”
“I know it,” the boy said. “I’ll be right back. Have another coffee. We have credit
here.”
He walked off, bare-footed on the coral rocks, to the ice house where the baits were
stored.
The old man drank his coffee slowly. It was all he would have all day and he knew
that he should take it. For a long time now eating had bored him and he never carried a
lunch. He had a bottle of water in the bow of the skiff and that was all he needed for the
day.
-9-The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
The boy was back now with the sardines and the two baits wrapped in a newspaper
and they went down the trail to the skiff, feeling the pebbled sand under their feet, and
lifted the skiff and slid her into the water.
[27] “Good luck old man.”
“Good luck,” the old man said. He fitted the rope lashings of the oars onto the thole
pins and, leaning forward against the thrust of the blades in the water, he began to row
out of the harbour in the dark. There were other boats from the other beaches going out
to sea and the old man heard the dip and push of their oars even though he could not see
them now the moon was below the hills.
Sometimes someone would speak in a boat. But most of the boats were silent except
for the dip of the oars. They spread apart after they were out of the mouth of the harbour
and each one headed for the part of the ocean where he hoped to find fish. The old man
knew he was going far out and he left the smell of the land behind and rowed out into the
clean early morning smell of the ocean. He saw the phosphorescence of the Gulf weed in
the water as he rowed over the part of the ocean that the fishermen called the great well
because there was a sudden deep of seven hundred fathoms where all sorts of fish
congregated because of the swirl the current made against the steep walls of the floor of
the ocean. Here there were concentrations of shrimp and bait fish and sometimes schools
of squid in the deepest holes and these rose close to the surface at night where all the
wandering fish fed on them.
In the dark the old man could feel the morning coming and as he rowed he heard the
trembling sound as flying fish left the water and the hissing that their stiff set wings made
as they soared away in the darkness. He was very fond of flying fish as they were his
principal friends on the ocean. He was sorry for the birds, especially the small delicate
dark terns that were always flying and looking and almost never finding, and he thought,
the birds have a harder life than we do except for the robber birds and the heavy strong
ones. Why did they make birds so delicate and fine as those sea swallows when the ocean
can be so cruel? She is kind and very beautiful. But she can be so cruel and it comes so
suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and hunting, with their small sad voices are
made too delicately for the sea.
He always thought of the sea as la mar which is what people call her in Spanish when
they love her. Sometimes those who love her say bad things of her but they are always
said as though she were a woman. Some of the younger fishermen, those who used buoys
as floats for their lines and had motorboats, bought [29] when the shark livers had
brought much money, spoke of her as el mar which is masculine. They spoke of her as a
contestant or a place or even an enemy. But the old man always thought of her as
feminine and as something that gave or withheld great favours, and if she did wild or
wicked things it was because she could not help them. The moon affects her as it does a
woman, he thought.
He was rowing steadily and it was no effort for him since he kept well within his
speed and the surface of the ocean was flat except for the occasional swirls of the current.
He was letting the current do a third of the work and as it started to be light he saw he
was already further out than he had hoped to be at this hour.
- 10 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
I worked the deep wells for a week and did nothing, he thought. Today I’ll work out
where the schools of bonito and albacore are and maybe there will be a big one with them.
Before it was really light he had his baits out and was drifting with the current. One bait
was down forty fathoms. The second was at seventy-five and the third and fourth were
down in the blue
water at one [30] hundred and one hundred and twenty-five fathoms. Each bait
hung head down with the shank of the hook inside the bait fish, tied and sewed solid and
all the projecting part of the hook, the curve and the point, was covered with fresh
sardines. Each sardine was hooked through both eyes so that they made a half-garland on
the projecting steel. There was no part of the hook that a great fish could feel which was
not sweet smelling and good tasting.
The boy had given him two fresh small tunas, or albacores, which hung on the two
deepest lines like plummets and, on the others, he had a big blue runner and a yellow
jack that had been used before; but they were in good condition still and had the
excellent sardines to give them scent and attractiveness. Each line, as thick around as a
big pencil, was looped onto a green-sapped stick so that any pull or touch on the bait
would make the stick dip and each line had two forty-fathom coils which could be made
fast to the other spare coils so that, if it were necessary, a fish could take out over three
hundred fathoms of line.
Now the man watched the dip of the three sticks over the side of the skiff and rowed
gently to keep the [31] lines straight up and down and at their proper depths. It was quite
light and any moment now the sun would rise.
The sun rose thinly from the sea and the old man could see the other boats, low on
the water and well in toward the shore, spread out across the current. Then the sun was
brighter and the glare came on the water and then, as it rose clear, the flat sea sent it back
at his eyes so that it hurt sharply and he rowed without looking into it. He looked down
into the water and watched the lines that went straight down into the dark of the water.
He kept them straighter than anyone did, so that at each level in the darkness of the
stream there would be a bait waiting exactly where he wished it to be for any fish that
swam there. Others let them drift with the current and sometimes they were at sixty
fathoms when the fishermen thought they were at a hundred.
But, he thought, I keep them with precision. Only I have no luck any more. But who
knows? Maybe today. Every day is a new day. It is better to be lucky. But I would rather
be exact. Then when luck comes you are ready.
The sun was two hours higher now and it did not [32] hurt his eyes so much to look
into the east. There were only three boats in sight now and they showed very low and far
inshore.
All my life the early sun has hurt my eyes, he thought. Yet they are still good. In the
evening I can look straight into it without getting the blackness. It has more force in the
evening too. But in the morning it is painful.
Just then he saw a man-of-war bird with his long black wings circling in the sky
ahead of him. He made a quick drop, slanting down on his back-swept wings, and then
- 11 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
circled again.
“He’s got something,” the old man said aloud. “He’s not just looking.”
He rowed slowly and steadily toward where the bird was circling. He did not hurry
and he kept his lines straight up and down. But he crowded the current a little so that he
was still fishing correctly though faster than he would have fished if he was not trying to
use the bird.
The bird went higher in the air and circled again, his wings motionless. Then he dove
suddenly and the old man saw flying fish spurt out of the water and sail desperately over
the surface.
[33] “Dolphin,” the old man said aloud. “Big dolphin.”
He shipped his oars and brought a small line from under the bow. It had a wire
leader and a medium-sized hook and he baited it with one of the sardines. He let it go
over the side and then made it fast to a ring bolt in the stern. Then he baited another line
and left it coiled in the shade of the bow. He went back to rowing and to watching the
long-winged black bird who was working, now, low over the water.
As he watched the bird dipped again slanting his wings for the dive and then
swinging them wildly and ineffectually as he followed the flying fish. The old man could
see the slight bulge in the water that the big dolphin raised as they followed the escaping
fish. The dolphin were cutting through the water below the flight of the fish and would be
in the water, driving at speed, when the fish dropped. It is a big school of dolphin, he
thought. They are widespread and the flying fish have little chance. The bird has no
chance. The flying fish are too big for him and they go too fast.
He watched the flying fish burst out again and again and the ineffectual movements
of the bird. That school has gotten away from me, he thought. They are moving out too
fast and too far. But perhaps I will pick up [34] a stray and perhaps my big fish is around
them. My big fish must be somewhere.
The clouds over the land now rose like mountains and the coast was only a long
green line with the gray blue hills behind it. The water was a dark blue now, so dark that
it was almost purple. As he looked down into it he saw the red sifting of the plankton in
the dark water and the strange light the sun made now. He watched his lines to see them
go straight down out of sight into the water and he was happy to see so much plankton
because it meant fish. The strange light the sun made in the water, now that the sun was
higher, meant good weather and so did the shape of the clouds over the land. But the bird
was almost out of sight now and nothing showed on the surface of the water but some
patches of yellow, sun-bleached Sargasso weed and the purple, formalized, iridescent,
gelatinous bladder of a Portuguese man-of-war floating dose beside the boat. It turned on
its side and then righted itself. It floated cheerfully as a bubble with its long deadly purple
filaments trailing a yard behind it in the water.
“Agua mala,” the man said. “You whore.”
From where he swung lightly against his oars he looked down into the water and saw
- 12 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
the tiny fish that [35] were coloured like the trailing filaments and swam between them
and under the small shade the bubble made as it drifted. They were immune to its poison.
But men were not and when same of the filaments would catch on a line and rest there
slimy and purple while the old man was working a fish, he would have welts and sores on
his arms and hands of the sort that poison ivy or poison oak can give. But these
poisonings from the agua mala came quickly and struck like a whiplash.
The iridescent bubbles were beautiful. But they were the falsest thing in the sea and
the old man loved to see the big sea turtles eating them. The turtles saw them,
approached them from the front, then shut their eyes so they were completely carapaced
and ate them filaments and all. The old man loved to see the turtles eat them and he
loved to walk on them on the beach after a storm and hear them pop when he stepped on
them with the horny soles of his feet.
He loved green turtles and hawk-bills with their elegance and speed and their great
value and he had a friendly contempt for the huge, stupid loggerheads, yellow in their
armour-plating, strange in their [36] love-making, and happily eating the Portuguese
men-of-war with their eyes shut.
He had no mysticism about turtles although he had gone in turtle boats for many
years. He was sorry for them all, even the great trunk backs that were as long as the skiff
and weighed a ton. Most people are heartless about turtles because a turtle’s heart will
beat for hours after he has been cut up and butchered. But the old man thought, I have
such a heart too and my feet and hands are like theirs. He ate the white eggs to give
himself strength. He ate them all through May to be strong in September and October for
the truly big fish.
He also drank a cup of shark liver oil each day from the big drum in the shack where
many of the fishermen kept their gear. It was there for all fishermen who wanted it. Most
fishermen hated the taste. But it was no worse than getting up at the hours that they rose
and it was very good against all colds and grippes and it was good for the eyes.
Now the old man looked up and saw that the bird was circling again.
“He’s found fish,” he said aloud. No flying fish broke the surface and there was no
scattering of bait [37] fish. But as the old man watched, a small tuna rose in the air,
turned and dropped head first into the water. The tuna shone silver in the sun and after
he had dropped back into the water another and another rose and they were jumping in
all directions, churning the water and leaping in long jumps after the bait. They were
circling it and driving it.
If they don’t travel too fast I will get into them, the old man thought, and he watched
the school working the water white and the bird now dropping and dipping into the bait
fish that were forced to the surface in their panic.
“The bird is a great help,” the old man said. Just then the stern line came taut under
his foot, where he had kept a loop of the line, and he dropped his oars and felt tile weight
of the small tuna’s shivering pull as he held the line firm and commenced to haul it in.
The shivering increased as he pulled in and he could see the blue back of the fish in the
water and the gold of his sides before he swung him over the side and into the boat. He
- 13 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
lay in the stern in the sun, compact and bullet shaped, his big, unintelligent eyes staring
as he thumped his life out against the planking of the boat with the quick shivering
strokes of his neat, fast-moving [38] tail. The old man hit him on the head for kindness
and kicked him, his body still shuddering, under the shade of the stern.
“Albacore,” he said aloud. “He’ll make a beautiful bait. He’ll weigh ten pounds.”
He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was by himself.
He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he had sung at night sometimes
when he was alone steering on his watch in the smacks or in the turtle boats. He had
probably started to talk aloud, when alone, when the boy had left. But he did not
remember. When he and the boy fished together they usually spoke only when it was
necessary. They talked at night or when they were storm-bound by bad weather. It was
considered a virtue not to talk unnecessarily at sea and the old man had always
considered it so and respected it. But now he said his thoughts aloud many times since
there was no one that they could annoy.
“If the others heard me talking out loud they would think that I am crazy,” he said
aloud. “But since I am not crazy, I do not care. And the rich have radios to talk to them in
their boats and to bring them the baseball.”
[39] Now is no time to think of baseball, he thought. Now is the time to think of only
one thing. That which I was born for. There might be a big one around that school, he
thought. I picked up only a straggler from the albacore that were feeding. But they are
working far out and fast. Everything that shows on the surface today travels very fast and
to the north-east. Can that be the time of day? Or is it some sign of weather that I do not
know?
He could not see the green of the shore now but only the tops of the blue hills that
showed white as though they were snow-capped and the clouds that looked like high
snow mountains above them. The sea was very dark and the light made prisms in the
water. The myriad flecks of the plankton were annulled now by the high sun and it was
only the great deep prisms in the blue water that the old man saw now with his lines
going straight down into the water that was a mile deep.
The tuna, the fishermen called all the fish of that species tuna and only distinguished
among them by their proper names when they came to sell them or to trade them for
baits, were down again. The sun was [40] hot now and the old man felt it on the back of
his neck and felt the sweat trickle down his back as he rowed.
I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a bight of line around my toe to wake
me. But today is eighty-five days and I should fish the day well.
Just then, watching his lines, he saw one of the projecting green sticks dip sharply.
“Yes,” he said. “Yes,” and shipped his oars without bumping the boat. He reached out
for the line and held it softly between the thumb and forefinger of his right hand. He felt
no strain nor weight and he held the line lightly. Then it came again. This time it was a
tentative pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew exactly what it was. One hundred
fathoms down a marlin was eating the sardines that covered the point and the shank of
- 14 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
the hook where the hand-forged hook projected from the head of the small tuna.
The old man held the line delicately, and softly, with his left hand, unleashed it from
the stick. Now he could let it run through his fingers without the fish feeling any tension.
This far out, he must be huge in this month, he thought. Eat them, fish. Eat them.
Please eat them.
[41] How fresh they are and you down there six hundred feet in that cold water in the
dark. Make another turn in the dark and come back and eat them. He felt the light
delicate pulling and then a harder pull when a sardine’s head must have been more
difficult to break from the hook. Then there was nothing.
“Come on,” the old man said aloud. “Make another turn. Just smell them. Aren’t they
lovely? Eat them good now and then there is the tuna. Hard and cold and lovely. Don’t be
shy, fish. Eat them.”
He waited with the line between his thumb and his finger, watching it and the other
lines at the same time for the fish might have swum up or down. Then came the same
delicate pulling touch again.
“He’ll take it,” the old man said aloud. “God help him to take it.”
He did not take it though. He was gone and the old man felt nothing.
“He can’t have gone,” he said. “Christ knows he can’t have gone. He’s making a turn.
Maybe he
has been hooked before and he remembers something of it.
[42] Then he felt the gentle touch on the line and he was happy.
“It was only his turn,” he said. “He’ll take it.”
He was happy feeling the gentle pulling and then he felt something hard and
unbelievably heavy. It was the weight of the fish and he let the line slip down, down,
down, unrolling off the first of the two reserve coils. As it went down, slipping lightly
through the old man’s fingers, he still could feel the great weight, though the pressure of
his thumb and finger were almost imperceptible. “What a fish,” he said. “He has it
sideways in his mouth now and he is moving off with it.”
Then he will turn and swallow it, he thought. He did not say that because he knew
that if you said a good thing it might not happen. He knew what a huge fish this was and
he thought of him moving away in the darkness with the tuna held crosswise in his
mouth. At that moment he felt him stop moving but the weight was still there. Then the
weight increased and he gave more line. He tightened the pressure of his thumb and
finger for a moment and the weight increased and was going straight down.
[43] “He’s taken it,” he said. “Now I’ll let him eat it well.”
He let the line slip through his fingers while he reached down with his left hand and
made fast the free end of the two reserve coils to the loop of the two reserve coils of the
next line. Now he was ready. He had three forty-fathom coils of line in reserve now, as
- 15 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
well as the coil he was using.
“Eat it a little more,” he said. “Eat it well.”
Eat it so that the point of the hook goes into your heart and kills you, he thought.
Come up easy and let me put the harpoon into you. All right. Are you ready? Have you
been long enough at table?
“Now!” he said aloud and struck hard with both hands, gained a yard of line and
then struck again and again, swinging with each arm alternately on the cord with all the
strength of his arms and the pivoted weight of his body.
Nothing happened. The fish just moved away slowly and the old man could not raise
him an inch. His line was strong and made for heavy fish and he held it against his hack
until it was so taut that beads of water were jumping from it. Then it began to make a
slow hissing sound in the water and he still held it, bracing [44] himself against the
thwart and leaning back against the pull. The boat began to move slowly off toward the
north-west.
The fish moved steadily and they travelled slowly on the calm water. The other baits
were still in the water but there was nothing to be done.
“I wish I had the boy” the old man said aloud. “I’m being towed by a fish and I’m the
towing bitt. I could make the line fast. But then he could break it. I must hold him all I
can and give him line when he must have it. Thank God he is travelling and not going
down.”
What I will do if he decides to go down, I don’t know. What I’ll do if he sounds and
dies I don’t know. But I’ll do something. There are plenty of things I can do.
He held the line against his back and watched its slant in the water and the skiff
moving steadily to the north-west.
This will kill him, the old man thought. He can’t do this forever. But four hours later
the fish was still swimming steadily out to sea, towing the skiff, and the old man was still
braced solidly with the line across his back.
[45] “It was noon when I hooked him,” he said. “And I have never seen him.”
He had pushed his straw hat hard down on his head before he hooked the fish and it
was cutting his forehead. He was thirsty too and he got down on his knees and, being
careful not to jerk on the line, moved as far into the bow as he could get and reached the
water bottle with one hand. He opened it and drank a little. Then he rested against the
bow. He rested sitting on the un-stepped mast and sail and tried not to think but only to
endure.
Then he looked behind him and saw that no land was visible. That makes no
difference, he thought. I can always come in on the glow from Havana. There are two
more hours before the sun sets and maybe he will come up before that. If he doesn’t
maybe he will come up with the moon. If he does not do that maybe he will come up with
the sunrise. I have no cramps and I feel strong. It is he that has the hook in his mouth.
- 16 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
But what a fish to pull like that. He must have his mouth shut tight on the wire. I wish I
could see him. I wish I could see him only once to know what I have against me.
The fish never changed his course nor his direction [46] all that night as far as the
man could tell from watching the stars. It was cold after the sun went down and the old
man’s sweat dried cold on his back and his arms and his old legs. During the day he had
taken the sack that covered the bait box and spread it in the sun to dry. After the sun
went down he tied it around his neck so that it hung down over his back and he
cautiously worked it down under the line that was across his shoulders now. The sack
cushioned the line and he had found a way of leaning forward against the bow so that he
was almost comfortable. The position actually was only somewhat less intolerable; but he
thought of it as almost comfortable.
I can do nothing with him and he can do nothing with me, he thought. Not as long as
he keeps this up.
Once he stood up and urinated over the side of the skiff and looked at the stars and
checked his course. The line showed like a phosphorescent streak in the water straight
out from his shoulders. They were moving more slowly now and the glow of Havana was
not so strong, so that he knew the current must be carrying them to the eastward. If I lose
the glare of Havana we must be going more to the eastward, he thought. For if the fish’s
course held true I must see it for many more [47] hours. I wonder how the baseball came
out in the grand leagues today, he thought. It would be wonderful to do this with a radio.
Then he thought, think of it always. Think of what you are doing. You must do nothing
stupid.
Then he said aloud, “I wish I had the boy. To help me and to see this.”
No one should be alone in their old age, he thought. But it is unavoidable. I must
remember to eat the tuna before he spoils in order to keep strong. Remember, no matter
how little you want to, that you must eat him in the morning. Remember, he said to
himself.
During the night two porpoises came around the boat and he could hear them rolling
and blowing. He could tell the difference between the blowing noise the male made and
the sighing blow of the female.
“They are good,” he said. “They play and make jokes and love one another. They are
our brothers like the flying fish.”
Then he began to pity the great fish that he had hooked. He is wonderful and strange
and who knows how old he is, he thought. Never have I had such a strong fish nor one
who acted so strangely. Perhaps he is too wise to jump. He could ruin me by jumping or
[48] by a wild rush. But perhaps he has been hooked many times before and he knows
that this is how he should make his fight. He cannot know that it is only one man against
him, nor that it is an old man. But what a great fish he is and what will he bring in the
market if the flesh is good. He took the bait like a male and he pulls like a male and his
fight has no panic in it. I wonder if he has any plans or if he is just as desperate as I am?
He remembered the time he had hooked one of a pair of marlin. The male fish
- 17 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
always let the female fish feed first and the hooked fish, the female, made a wild,
panic-stricken, despairing fight that soon exhausted her, and all the time the male had
stayed with her, crossing the line and circling with her on the surface. He had stayed so
close that the old man was afraid he would cut the line with his tail which was sharp as a
scythe and almost of that size and shape. When the old man had gaffed her and clubbed
her, holding the rapier bill with its sandpaper edge and dubbing her across the top of her
head until her colour turned to a colour almost like the backing of mirrors, and then, with
the boy’s aid, hoisted her aboard, the male fish had stayed by the side of the boat. Then,
while the old man was clearing the lines and preparing the harpoon, [49] the male fish
jumped high into the air beside the boat to see where the female was and then went down
deep, his lavender wings, that were his pectoral fins, spread wide and all his wide
lavender stripes showing. He was beautiful, the old man remembered, and he had stayed.
That was the saddest thing I ever saw with them, the old man thought. The boy was
sad too and we begged her pardon and butchered her promptly.
“I wish the boy was here,” he said aloud and settled himself against the rounded
planks of the bow and felt the strength of the great fish through the line he held across his
shoulders moving steadily toward whatever he had chosen.
When once, through my treachery, it had been necessary to him to make a choice,
the old man thought.
His choice had been to stay in the deep dark water far out beyond all snares and
traps and treacheries. My choice was to go there to find him beyond all people. Beyond all
people in the world. Now we are joined together and have been since noon. And no one to
help either one of us.
Perhaps I should not have been a fisherman, he thought. But that was the thing that
I was born for. I must surely remember to eat the tuna after it gets light.
[50] Some time before daylight something took one of the baits that were behind
him. He heard the stick break and the line begin to rush out over the gunwale of the skiff.
In the darkness he loosened his sheath knife and taking all the strain of the fish on his
left shoulder he leaned back and cut the line against the wood of the gunwale. Then he
cut the other line closest to him and in the dark made the loose ends of the reserve coils
fast. He worked skillfully with the one hand and put his foot on the coils to hold them as
he drew his knots tight. Now he had six reserve coils of line. There were two from each
bait he had severed and the two from the bait the fish had taken and they were all
connected.
After it is light, he thought, I will work back to the forty-fathom bait and cut it away
too and link up the reserve coils. I will have lost two hundred fathoms of good Catalan
cardel and the hooks and leaders. That can be replaced. But who replaces this fish if I
hook some fish and it cuts him off?
I don’t know what that fish was that took the bait just now. It could have been a
marlin or a broadbill or a shark. I never felt him. I had to get rid of him too fast.
Aloud he said, “I wish I had the boy.”
- 18 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
[51] But you haven’t got the boy, he thought. You have only yourself and you had
better work back to the last line now, in the dark or not in the dark, and cut it away and
hook up the two reserve coils.
So he did it. It was difficult in the dark and once the fish made a surge that pulled
him down on his face and made a cut below his eye. The blood ran down his cheek a little
way. But it coagulated and dried before it reached his chin and he worked his way back to
the bow and rested against the wood. He adjusted the sack and carefully worked the line
so that it came across a new part of his shoulders and, holding it anchored with his
shoulders, he carefully felt the pull of the fish and then felt with his hand the progress of
the skiff through the water.
I wonder what he made that lurch for, he thought. The wire must have slipped on the
great hill of his back. Certainly his back cannot feel as badly as mine does. But he cannot
pull this skiff forever, no matter how great he is. Now everything is cleared away that
might make trouble and I have a big reserve of line; all that a man can ask.
“Fish,” he said softly, aloud, “I’ll stay with you until I am dead.”
[52] He’ll stay with me too, I suppose, the old man thought and he waited for it to be
light. It was cold now in the time before daylight and he pushed against the wood to be
warm. I can do it as long as he can, he thought. And in the first light the line extended out
and down into the water. The boat moved steadily and when the first edge of the sun rose
it was on the old man’s right shoulder.
“He’s headed north,” the old man said. The current will have set us far to the
eastward, he thought. I wish he would turn with the current. That would show that he
was tiring.
When the sun had risen further the old man realized that the fish was not tiring.
There was only one favorable sign. The slant of the line showed he was swimming at a
lesser depth. That did not necessarily mean that he would jump. But he might.
“God let him jump,” the old man said. “I have enough line to handle him.”
Maybe if I can increase the tension just a little it will hurt him and he will jump, he
thought. Now that it is daylight let him jump so that he’ll fill the sacks along his backbone
with air and then he cannot go deep to die.
[53] He tried to increase the tension, but the line had been taut up to the very edge of
the breaking point since he had hooked the fish and he felt the harshness as he leaned
back to pull and knew he could put no more strain on it. I must not jerk it ever, he
thought. Each jerk widens the cut the hook makes and then when he does jump he might
throw it. Anyway I feel better with the sun and for once I do not have to look into it.
There was yellow weed on the line but the old man knew that only made an added
drag and he was pleased. It was the yellow Gulf weed that had made so much
phosphorescence in the night.
“Fish,” he said, “I love you and respect you very much. But I will kill you dead before
this day ends.”
- 19 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
Let us hope so, he thought.
A small bird came toward the skiff from the north. He was a warbler and flying very
low over
the water. The old man could see that he was very tired. The bird made the stern of
the boat and rested there. Then he flew around the old man’s head and rested on the line
where he was more comfortable. “How old are you?” the old man asked the bird. “Is this
your first trip?”
[54] The bird looked at him when he spoke. He was too tired even to examine the
line and he teetered on it as his delicate feet gripped it fast.
“It’s steady,” the old man told him. “It’s too steady. You shouldn’t be that tired after
a windless night. What are birds coming to?”
The hawks, he thought, that come out to sea to meet them. But he said nothing of
this to the bird who could not understand him anyway and who would learn about the
hawks soon enough.
“Take a good rest, small bird,” he said. “Then go in and take your chance like any
man or bird or fish.”
It encouraged him to talk because his back had stiffened in the night and it hurt truly
now.
“Stay at my house if you like, bird,” he said. “I am sorry I cannot hoist the sail and
take you in with the small breeze that is rising. But I am with a friend.”
Just then the fish gave a sudden lurch that pulled the old man down onto the bow
and would have pulled him overboard if he had not braced himself and given some line.
The bird had flown up when the line jerked and the old man had not even seen him
go. He felt the line [55] carefully with his right hand and noticed his hand was bleeding.
“Something hurt him then,” he said aloud and pulled back on the line to see if he
could turn the fish. But when he was touching the breaking point he held steady and
settled back against the strain of the line.
“You’re feeling it now, fish,” he said. “And so, God knows, am I.”
He looked around for the bird now because he would have liked him for company.
The bird was gone.
You did not stay long, the man thought. But it is rougher where you are going until
you make the shore. How did I let the fish cut me with that one quick pull he made? I
must be getting very stupid. Or perhaps I was looking at the small bird and thinking of
him. Now I will pay attention to my work and then I must eat the tuna so that I will not
have a failure of strength.
“I wish the boy were here and that I had some salt,” he said aloud.
- 20 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
Shifting the weight of the line to his left shoulder and kneeling carefully he washed
his hand in the ocean and held it there, submerged, for more than a [56] minute watching
the blood trail away and the steady movement of the water against his hand as the boat
moved.
“He has slowed much,” he said.
The old man would have liked to keep his hand in the salt water longer but he was
afraid of another sudden lurch by the fish and he stood up and braced himself and held
his hand up against the sun. It was only a line burn that had cut his flesh. But it was in
the working part of his hand. He knew he would need his hands before this was over and
he did not like to be cut before it started.
“Now,” he said, when his hand had dried, “I must eat the small tuna. I can reach him
with the gaff and eat him here in comfort.”
He knelt down and found the tuna under the stem with the gaff and drew it toward
him keeping it clear of the coiled lines. Holding the line with his left shoulder again, and
bracing on his left hand and arm, he took the tuna off the gaff hook and put the gaff back
in place. He put one knee on the fish and cut strips of dark red meat longitudinally from
the back of the head to the tail. They were wedge-shaped strips and he cut [57] them from
next to the back bone down to the edge of the belly. When he had cut six strips he spread
them out on the wood of the bow, wiped his knife on his trousers, and lifted the carcass of
the bonito by the tail and dropped it overboard.
“I don’t think I can eat an entire one,” he said and drew his knife across one of the
strips. He could feel the steady hard pull of the line and his left hand was cramped. It
drew up tight on the heavy cord and he looked at it in disgust.
“What kind of a hand is that,” he said. “Cramp then if you want. Make yourself into a
claw. It will do you no good.”
Come on, he thought and looked down into the dark water at the slant of the line.
Eat it now and it will strengthen the hand. It is not the hand’s fault and you have been
many hours with the fish. But you can stay with him forever. Eat the bonito now.
He picked up a piece and put it in his mouth and chewed it slowly. It was not
unpleasant.
Chew it well, he thought, and get all the juices. It would not be had to eat with a little
lime or with lemon or with salt.
“How do you feel, hand?” he asked the cramped [58] hand that was almost as stiff as
rigor mortis. “I’ll eat some more for you.”
He ate the other part of the piece that he had cut in two. He chewed it carefully and
then spat out the skin.
“How does it go, hand? Or is it too early to know?”
He took another full piece and chewed it.
- 21 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“It is a strong full-blooded fish,” he thought. “I was lucky to get him instead of
dolphin. Dolphin is too sweet. This is hardly sweet at all and all the strength is still in it.”
There is no sense in being anything but practical though, he thought. I wish I had
some salt. And I do not know whether the sun will rot or dry what is left, so I had better
eat it all although I am not hungry. The fish is calm and steady. I will eat it all and then I
will be ready.
“Be patient, hand,” he said. “I do this for you.”
I wish I could feed the fish, he thought. He is my brother. But I must kill him and
keep strong to do it. Slowly and conscientiously he ate all of the wedge-shaped strips of
fish.
He straightened up, wiping his hand on his trousers. “Now,” he said. “You can let the
cord go, hand, and I will handle him with the right arm alone until you [59] stop that
nonsense.” He put his left foot on the heavy line that the left hand had held and lay back
against the pull against his back.
“God help me to have the cramp go,” he said. “Because I do not know what the fish is
going to do.”
But he seems calm, he thought, and following his plan. But what is his plan, he
thought. And what is mine? Mine I must improvise to his because of his great size. If he
will jump I can kill him. But he stays down forever. Then I will stay down with him
forever.
He rubbed the cramped hand against his trousers and tried to gentle the fingers. But
it would not open. Maybe it will open with the sun, he thought. Maybe it will open when
the strong raw tuna is digested. If I have to have it, I will open it, cost whatever it costs.
But I do not want to open it now by force. Let it open by itself and come back of its own
accord. After all I abused it much in the night when it was necessary to free and untie the
various lines.
He looked across the sea and knew how alone he was now. But he could see the
prisms in the deep dark water and the line stretching ahead and the strange undulation
of the calm. The clouds were building up now for the trade wind and he looked ahead and
saw a [60] flight of wild ducks etching themselves against the sky over the water, then
blurring, then etching again and he knew no man was ever alone on the sea.
He thought of how some men feared being out of sight of land in a small boar and
knew they were right in the months of sudden bad weather. But now they were in
hurricane months and, when there are no hurricanes, the weather of hurricane months is
the best of all the year.
If there is a hurricane you always see the signs of it in the sky for days ahead, if you
are at sea. They do not see it ashore because they do not know what to look for, he
thought. The land must make a difference too, in the shape of the clouds. But we have no
hurricane coming now.
He looked at the sky and saw the white cumulus built like friendly piles of ice cream
- 22 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
and high above were the thin feathers of the cirrus against the high September sky.
“Light brisa,” he said. “Better weather for me than for you, fish.”
His left hand was still cramped, but he was unknotting it slowly.
I hate a cramp, he thought. It is a treachery of one’s [61] own body. It is humiliating
before others to have a diarrhoea from ptomaine poisoning or to vomit from it. But a
cramp, he thought of it as a calambre, humiliates oneself especially when one is alone.
If the boy were here he could rub it for me and loosen it down from the forearm, he
thought. But it will loosen up.
Then, with his right hand he felt the difference in the pull of the line before he saw
the slant change in the water. Then, as he leaned against the line and slapped his left
hand hard and fast against his thigh he saw the line slanting slowly upward.
“He’s coming up,” he said. “Come on hand. Please come on.”
The line rose slowly and steadily and then the surface of the ocean bulged ahead of
the boat and the fish came out. He came out unendingly and water poured from his sides.
He was bright in the sun and his head and back were dark purple and in the sun the
stripes on his sides showed wide and a light lavender. His sword was as long as a baseball
bat and tapered like a rapier and he rose his full length from the water and then
re-entered it, smoothly, like a diver and the old [62] man saw the great scythe-blade of
his tail go under and the line commenced to race out.
“He is two feet longer than the skiff,” the old man said. The line was going out fast
but steadily and the fish was not panicked. The old man was trying with both hands to
keep the line just inside of breaking strength. He knew that if he could not slow the fish
with a steady pressure the fish could take out all the line and break it.
He is a great fish and I must convince him, he thought. I must never let him learn his
strength nor what he could do if he made his run. If I were him I would put in everything
now and go until something broke. But, thank God, they are not as intelligent as we who
kill them; although they are more noble and more able.
The old man had seen many great fish. He had seen many that weighed more than a
thousand pounds and he had caught two of that size in his life, but never alone. Now
alone, and out of sight of land, he was fast to the biggest fish that he had ever seen and
bigger than he had ever heard of, and his left hand was still as tight as the gripped claws
of an eagle.
[63] It will uncramp though, he thought. Surely it will uncramp to help my right
hand. There are three things that are brothers: the fish and my two hands. It must
uncramp. It is unworthy of it to be cramped. The fish had slowed again and was going at
his usual pace.
I wonder why he jumped, the old man thought. He jumped almost as though to show
me how big he was. I know now, anyway, he thought. I wish I could show him what sort
of man I am. But then he would see the cramped hand. Let him think I am more man
- 23 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
than I am and I will be so. I wish I was the fish, he thought, with everything he has
against only my will and my intelligence.
He settled comfortably against the wood and took his suffering as it came and the
fish swam steadily and the boat moved slowly through the dark water. There was a small
sea rising with the wind coming up from the east and at noon the old man’s left hand was
uncramped.
“Bad news for you, fish,” he said and shifted the line over the sacks that covered his
shoulders.
He was comfortable but suffering, although he did not admit the suffering at all.
“I am not religious,” he said. “But I will say ten Our [64] Fathers and ten Hail Marys
that I should catch this fish, and I promise to make a pilgrimage to the Virgin of Cobre if I
catch him. That is a promise.”
He commenced to say his prayers mechanically. Sometimes he would be so tired that
he could not remember the prayer and then he would say them fast so that they would
come automatically. Hail Marys are easier to say than Our Fathers, he thought.
“Hail Mary full of Grace the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners
now and at the hour of our death. Amen.” Then he added, “Blessed Virgin, pray for the
death of this fish. Wonderful though he is.”
With his prayers said, and feeling much better, but suffering exactly as much, and
perhaps a little more, he leaned against the wood of the bow and began, mechanically, to
work the fingers of his left hand.
The sun was hot now although the breeze was rising gently.
“I had better re-bait that little line out over the stern,” he said. “If the fish decides to
stay another night I will need to eat again and the water is low in the bottle. I don’t think
I can get anything but a dolphin [65] here. But if I eat him fresh enough he won’t be bad.
I wish a flying fish would come on board tonight. But I have no light to attract them. A
flying fish is excellent to eat raw and I would not have to cut him up. I must save all my
strength now. Christ, I did not know he was so big.”
“I’ll kill him though,” he said. “In all his greatness and his glory.”
Although it is unjust, he thought. But I will show him what a man can do and what a
man endures.
“I told the boy I was a strange old man,” he said.
“Now is when I must prove it.”
The thousand times that he had proved it meant nothing. Now he was proving it
again. Each time was a new time and he never thought about the past when he was doing
it.
- 24 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
I wish he’d sleep and I could sleep and dream about the lions, he thought. Why are
the lions the main thing that is left? Don’t think, old man, he said to himself, Rest gently
now against the wood and think of nothing. He is working. Work as little as you can.
It was getting into the afternoon and the boat still moved slowly and steadily. But
there was an added drag now from the easterly breeze and the old man [66] rode gently
with the small sea and the hurt of the cord across his back came to him easily and
smoothly.
Once in the afternoon the line started to rise again. But the fish only continued to
swim at a slightly higher level. The sun was on the old man’s left arm and shoulder and
on his back. So he knew the fish had turned east of north.
Now that he had seen him once, he could picture the fish swimming in the water
with his purple pectoral fins set wide as wings and the great erect tail slicing through the
dark. I wonder how much he sees at that depth, the old man thought. His eye is huge and
a horse, with much less eye, can see in the dark. Once I could see quite well in the dark.
Not in the absolute dark. But almost as a cat sees.
The sun and his steady movement of his fingers had uncramped his left hand now
completely and he began to shift more of the strain to it and he shrugged the muscles of
his back to shift the hurt of the cord a little.
“If you’re not tired, fish,” he said aloud, “you must be very strange.”
He felt very tired now and he knew the night would come soon and he tried to think
of other things. He thought of the Big Leagues, to him they were the Gran [67] Ligas, and
he knew that the Yankees of New York were playing the Tigres of Detroit.
This is the second day now that I do not know the result of the juegos, he thought.
But I must have confidence and I must be worthy of the great DiMaggio who does all
things perfectly even with the pain of the bone spur in his heel. What is a bone spur? he
asked himself. Un espuela de hueso. We do not have them. Can it be as painful as the
spur of a fighting cock in one’s heel? I do not think I could endure that or the loss of the
eye and of both eyes and continue to fight as the fighting cocks do. Man is not much
beside the great birds and beasts. Still I would rather be that beast down there in the
darkness of the sea.
“Unless sharks come,” he said aloud. “If sharks come, God pity him and me.”
Do you believe the great DiMaggio would stay with a fish as long as I will stay with
this one? he thought. I am sure he would and more since he is young and strong. Also his
father was a fisherman. But would the bone spur hurt him too much?
“I do not know,” he said aloud. “I never had a bone spur.”
As the sun set he remembered, to give himself more [68] confidence, the time in the
tavern at Casablanca when he had played the hand game with the great negro from
Cienfuegos who was the strongest man on the docks. They had gone one day and one
night with their elbows on a chalk line on the table and their forearms straight up and
their hands gripped tight. Each one was trying to force the other’s hand down onto the
- 25 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
table. There was much betting and people went in and out of the room under the
kerosene lights and he had looked at the arm and hand of the negro and at the negro’s
face. They changed the referees every four hours after the first eight so that the referees
could sleep. Blood came out from under the fingernails of both his and the negro’s hands
and they looked each other in the eye and at their hands and forearms and the bettors
went in and out of the room and sat on high chairs against the wall and watched. The
walls were painted bright blue and were of wood and the lamps threw their shadows
against them. The negro’s shadow was huge and it moved on the wall as the breeze
moved the lamps.
The odds would change back and forth all night and they fed the negro rum and
lighted cigarettes for him.
Then the negro, after the rum, would try for a tremendous [69] effort and once he
had the old man, who was not an old man then but was Santiago El Campeon, nearly
three inches off balance. But the old man had raised his hand up to dead even again. He
was sure then that he had the negro, who was a fine man and a great athlete, beaten. And
at daylight when the bettors were asking that it be called a draw and the referee was
shaking his head, he had unleashed his effort and forced the hand of the negro down and
down until it rested on the wood. The match had started on a Sunday morning and ended
on a Monday morning. Many of the bettors had asked for a draw because they had to go
to work on the docks loading sacks of sugar or at the Havana Coal Company. Otherwise
everyone would have wanted it to go to a finish. But he had finished it anyway and before
anyone had to go to work.
For a long time after that everyone had called him The Champion and there had
been a return match in the spring. But not much money was bet and he had won it quite
easily since he had broken the confidence of the negro from Cienfuegos in the first match.
After that he had a few matches and then no more. He decided that he could beat anyone
if he wanted to badly enough and he decided that it was bad for his right [70] hand for
fishing. He had tried a few practice matches with his left hand. But his left hand had
always been a traitor and would not do what he called on it to do and he did not trust it.
The sun will bake it out well now, he thought. It should not cramp on me again
unless it gets too cold in the night. I wonder what this night will bring.
An airplane passed overhead on its course to Miami and he watched its shadow
scaring up the schools of flying fish.
“With so much flying fish there should be dolphin,” he said, and leaned back on the
line to see if it was possible to gain any on his fish. But he could not and it stayed at the
hardness and water-drop shivering that preceded breaking. The boat moved ahead slowly
and he watched the airplane until he could no longer see it.
It must be very strange in an airplane, he thought. I wonder what the sea looks like
from that height? They should be able to see the fish well if they do not fly too high. I
would like to fly very slowly at two hundred fathoms high and see the fish from above. In
the turtle boats I was in the cross-trees of the mast-head and even at that height I saw
much. The dolphin look greener from there and you can see their stripes and their purple
- 26 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
[71] spots and you can see all of the school as they swim. Why is it that all the fast-moving
fish of the dark current have purple backs and usually purple stripes or spots? The
dolphin looks green of course because he is really golden. But when he comes to feed,
truly hungry, purple stripes show on his sides as on a marlin. Can it be anger, or the
greater speed he makes that brings them out?
Just before it was dark, as they passed a great island of Sargasso weed that heaved
and swung in the light sea as though the ocean were making love with something under a
yellow blanket, his small line was taken by a dolphin. He saw it first when it jumped in
the air, true gold in the last of the sun and bending and flapping wildly in the air. It
jumped again and again in the acrobatics of its fear and he worked his way back to the
stern and crouching and holding the big line with his right hand and arm, he pulled the
dolphin in with his left hand, stepping on the gained line each time with his bare left foot.
When the fish was at the stem, plunging and cutting from side to side in desperation, the
old man leaned over the stern and lifted the burnished gold fish with its purple spots over
the stem. Its jaws were working convulsively in quick bites against [72] the hook and it
pounded the bottom of the skiff with its long flat body, its tail and its head until he
clubbed it across the shining golden head until it shivered and was still.
The old man unhooked the fish, re-baited the line with another sardine and tossed it
over. Then he worked his way slowly back to the bow. He washed his left hand and wiped
it on his trousers. Then he shifted the heavy line from his right hand to his left and
washed his right hand in the sea while he watched the sun go into the ocean and the slant
of the big cord.
“He hasn’t changed at all,” he said. But watching the movement of the water against
his hand he noted that it was perceptibly slower.
“I’ll lash the two oars together across the stern and that will slow him in the night,”
he said. “He’s good for the night and so am I.”
It would be better to gut the dolphin a little later to save the blood in the meat, he
thought. I can do that a little later and lash the oars to make a drag at the same time. I
had better keep the fish quiet now and not disturb him too much at sunset. The setting of
the sun is a difficult time for all fish. He let his hand dry in the air then grasped the line
[73] with it and eased himself as much as he could and allowed himself to be pulled
forward against the wood so that the boat took the strain as much, or more, than he did.
I’m learning how to do it, he thought. This part of it anyway. Then too, remember he
hasn’t eaten since he took the bait and he is huge and needs much food. I have eaten the
whole bonito. Tomorrow I will eat the dolphin. He called it dorado. Perhaps I should eat
some of it when I clean it. It will be harder to eat than the bonito. But, then, nothing is
easy.
“How do you feel, fish?” he asked aloud. “I feel good and my left hand is better and I
have food for a night and a day. Pull the boat, fish.”
He did not truly feel good because the pain from the cord across his back had almost
passed pain and gone into a dullness that he mistrusted. But I have had worse things
than that, he thought. My hand is only cut a little and the cramp is gone from the other.
- 27 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
My legs are all right. Also now I have gained on him in the question of sustenance.
It was dark now as it becomes dark quickly after the sun sets in September. He lay
against the worn wood of the bow and rested all that he could. The first stars [74] were
out. He did not know the name of Rigel but he saw it and knew soon they would all be out
and he would have all his distant friends.
“The fish is my friend too,” he said aloud. “I have never seen or heard of such a fish.
But I must kill him. I am glad we do not have to try to kill the stars.”
Imagine if each day a man must try to kill the moon, he thought. The moon runs
away. But imagine if a man each day should have to try to kill the sun? We were born
lucky, he thought.
Then he was sorry for the great fish that had nothing to eat and his determination to
kill him never relaxed in his sorrow for him. How many people will he feed, he thought.
But are they worthy to eat him? No, of course not. There is no one worthy of eating him
from the manner of his behaviour and his great dignity.
I do not understand these things, he thought. But it is good that we do not have to
try to kill the sun or the moon or the stars. It is enough to live on the sea and kill our true
brothers.
Now, he thought, I must think about the drag. It has its perils and its merits. I may
lose so much line that I will lose him, if he makes his effort and the drag [75] made by the
oars is in place and the boat loses all her lightness. Her lightness prolongs both our
suffering but it is my safety since he has great speed that he has never yet employed. No
matter what passes I must gut the dolphin so he does not spoil and eat some of him to be
strong.
Now I will rest an hour more and feel that he is solid and steady before I move back
to the stern to do the work and make the decision. In the meantime I can see how he acts
and if he shows any changes. The oars are a good trick; but it has reached the time to play
for safety. He is much fish still and I saw that the hook was in the corner of his mouth
and he has kept his mouth tight shut. The punishment of the hook is nothing. The
punishment of hunger, and that he is against something that he does not comprehend, is
everything. Rest now, old man, and let him work until your next duty comes.
He rested for what he believed to be two hours. The moon did not rise now until late
and he had no way of judging the time. Nor was he really resting except comparatively.
He was still bearing the pull of the fish across his shoulders but he placed his left hand on
the [76] gunwale of the bow and confided more and more of the resistance to the fish to
the skiff itself.
How simple it would be if I could make the line fast, he thought. But with one small
lurch he could break it. I must cushion the pull of the line with my body and at all times
be ready to give line with both hands.
“But you have not slept yet, old man,” he said aloud. “It is half a day and a night and
now another day and you have not slept. You must devise a way so that you sleep a little if
- 28 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
he is quiet and steady. If you do not sleep you might become unclear in the head.”
I’m clear enough in the head, he thought. Too clear. I am as clear as the stars that are
my brothers. Still I must sleep. They sleep and the moon and the sun sleep and even the
ocean sleeps sometimes on certain days when there is no current and a flat calm.
But remember to sleep, he thought. Make yourself do it and devise some simple and
sure way about the lines. Now go back and prepare the dolphin. It is too dangerous to rig
the oars as a drag if you must sleep.
I could go without sleeping, he told himself. But it would be too dangerous.
[77] He started to work his way back to the stern on his hands and knees, being
careful not to jerk against the fish. He may be half asleep himself, he thought. But I do
not want him to rest. He must pull until he dies.
Back in the stern he turned so that his left hand held the strain of the line across his
shoulders and drew his knife from its sheath with his right hand. The stars were bright
now and he saw the dolphin clearly and he pushed the blade of his knife into his head
and drew him out from under the stern. He put one of his feet on the fish and slit him
quickly from the vent up to the tip of his lower jaw. Then he put his knife down and
gutted him with his right hand, scooping him clean and pulling the gills clear.
He felt the maw heavy and slippery in his hands and he slit it open. There were two
flying fish inside. They were fresh and hard and he laid them side by side and dropped
the guts and the gills over the stern. They sank leaving a trail of phosphorescence in the
water. The dolphin was cold and a leprous gray-white now in the starlight and the old
man skinned one side of him while he held his right foot on the fish’s head. Then he
turned him over and skinned the other side and cut each side off from the head down to
the tail.
[78] He slid the carcass overboard and looked to see if there was any swirl in the
water. But there was only the light of its slow descent. He turned then and placed the two
flying fish inside the two fillets of fish and putting his knife back in its sheath, he worked
his way slowly back to the bow. His back was bent with the weight of the line across it and
he carried the fish in his right hand.
Back in the bow he laid the two fillets of fish out on the wood with the flying fish
beside them. After that he settled the line across his shoulders in a new place and held it
again with his left hand resting on the gunwale. Then he leaned over the side and washed
the flying fish in the water, noting the speed of the water against his hand. His hand was
phosphorescent from skinning the fish and he watched the flow of the water against it.
The flow was less strong and as he rubbed the side of his hand against the planking of the
skiff, particles of phosphorus floated off and drifted slowly astern.
“He is tiring or he is resting,” the old man said. “Now let me get through the eating of
this dolphin and get some rest and a little sleep.”
Under the stars and with the night colder all the [79] time he ate half of one of the
dolphin fillets and one of the flying fish, gutted and with its head cut off.
- 29 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“What an excellent fish dolphin is to eat cooked,” he said. “And what a miserable fish
raw. I will never go in a boat again without salt or limes.”
If I had brains I would have splashed water on the bow all day and drying, it would
have made salt, he thought. But then I did not hook the dolphin until almost sunset. Still
it was a lack of preparation. But I have chewed it all well and I am not nauseated.
The sky was clouding over to the east and one after another the stars he knew were
gone. It looked now as though he were moving into a great canyon of clouds and the wind
had dropped.
“There will be bad weather in three or four days,” he said. “But not tonight and not
tomorrow. Rig now to get some sleep, old man, while the fish is calm and steady.”
He held the line tight in his right hand and then pushed his thigh against his right
hand as he leaned all his weight against the wood of the bow. Then he passed the line a
little lower on his shoulders and braced his left hand on it.
My right hand can hold it as long as it is braced, he [80] thought If it relaxes in sleep
my left hand will wake me as the line goes out. It is hard on the right hand. But he is used
to punishment Even if I sleep twenty minutes or a half an hour it is good. He lay forward
cramping himself against the line with all of his body, putting all his weight onto his right
band, and he was asleep.
He did not dream of the lions but instead of a vast school of porpoises that stretched
for eight or ten miles and it was in the time of their mating and they would leap high into
the air and return into the same hole they had made in the water when they leaped.
Then he dreamed that he was in the village on his bed and there was a norther and
he was very cold and his right arm was asleep because his head had rested on it instead of
a pillow.
After that he began to dream of the long yellow beach and he saw the first of the
lions come down onto it in the early dark and then the other lions came and he rested his
chin on the wood of the bows where the ship lay anchored with the evening off-shore
breeze and he waited to see if there would be more lions and he was happy.
The moon had been up for a long time but he slept [81] on and the fish pulled on
steadily and the boat moved into the tunnel of clouds.
He woke with the jerk of his right fist coming up against his face and the line burning
out through his right hand. He had no feeling of his left hand but he braked all he could
with his right and the line rushed out. Finally his left hand found the line and he leaned
back against the line and now it burned his back and his left hand, and his left hand was
taking all the strain and cutting badly. He looked back at the coils of line and they were
feeding smoothly. Just then the fish jumped making a great bursting of the ocean and
then a heavy fall. Then he jumped again and again and the boat was going fast although
line was still racing out and the old man was raising the strain to breaking point and
raising it to breaking point again and again. He had been pulled down tight onto the bow
and his face was in the cut slice of dolphin and he could not move.
- 30 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
This is what we waited for, he thought. So now let us take it. Make him pay for the
line, he thought. Make him pay for it.
He could not see the fish’s jumps but only heard the [82] breaking of the ocean and
the heavy splash as he fell. The speed of the line was cutting his hands badly but he had
always known this would happen and he tried to keep the cutting across the calloused
parts and not let the line slip into the palm nor cut the fingers.
If the boy was here he would wet the coils of line, he thought. Yes. If the boy were
here. If the boy were here.
The line went out and out and out but it was slowing now and he was making the fish
earn each inch of it. Now he got his head up from the wood and out of the slice of fish
that his cheek had crushed. Then he was on his knees and then he rose slowly to his feet.
He was ceding line but more slowly all he time. He worked back to where he could feel
with his foot the coils of line that he could not see. There was plenty of line still and now
the fish had to pull the friction of all that new line through the water.
Yes, he thought. And now he has jumped more than a dozen times and filled the
sacks along his back with air and he cannot go down deep to die where I cannot bring
him up. He will start circling soon and then I must work on him. I wonder what started
him so suddenly? Could it have been hunger that made him desperate, [83] or was he
frightened by something in the night? Maybe he suddenly felt fear. But he was such a
calm, strong fish and he seemed so fearless and so confident. It is strange.
“You better be fearless and confident yourself, old man,” he said. “You’re holding
him again but you cannot get line. But soon he has to circle.”
The old man held him with his left hand and his shoulders now and stooped down
and scooped up water in his right hand to get the crushed dolphin flesh off of his face. He
was afraid that it might nauseate him and he would vomit and lose his strength. When
his face was cleaned he washed his right hand in the water over the side and then let it
stay in the salt water while he watched the first light come before the sunrise. He’s
headed almost east, he thought. That means he is tired and going with the current. Soon
he will have to circle. Then our true work begins.
After he judged that his right hand had been in the water long enough he took it out
and looked at it.
“It is not bad,” he said. “And pain does not matter to a man.”
He took hold of the line carefully so that it did not fit into any of the fresh line cuts
and shifted his weight [84] so that he could put his left hand into the sea on the other
side of the skiff.
“You did not do so badly for something worthless,” he said to his left hand. “But
there was a moment when I could not find you.”
Why was I not born with two good hands? he thought. Perhaps it was my fault in not
training that one properly. But God knows he has had enough chances to learn. He did
not do so badly in the night, though, and he has only cramped once. If he cramps again
- 31 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
let the line cut him off.
When he thought that he knew that he was not being clear-headed and he thought he
should chew some more of the dolphin. But I can’t, he told himself. It is better to be
light-headed than to lose your strength from nausea. And I know I cannot keep it if I eat
it since my face was in it. I will keep it for an emergency until it goes bad. But it is too late
to try for strength now through nourishment. You’re stupid, he told himself. Eat the other
flying fish.
It was there, cleaned and ready, and he picked it up with his left hand and ate it
chewing the bones carefully and eating all of it down to the tail.
It has more nourishment than almost any fish, he [85] thought. At least the kind of
strength that I need. Now I have done what I can, he thought. Let him begin to circle and
let the fight come.
The sun was rising for the third time since he had put to sea when the fish started to
circle.
He could not see by the slant of the line that the fish was circling. It was too early for
that. He just felt a faint slackening of the pressure of the line and he commenced to pull
on it gently with his right hand. It tightened, as always, but just when he reached the
point where it would break, line began to come in. He slipped his shoulders and head
from under the line and began to pull in line steadily and gently. He used both of his
hands in a swinging motion and tried to do the pulling as much as he could with his body
and his legs. His old legs and shoulders pivoted with the swinging of the pulling.
“It is a very big circle,” he said. “But he is circling.” Then the line would not come in
any more and he held it until he saw the drops jumping from it in the sun. Then it started
out and the old man knelt down and let it go grudgingly back into the dark water.
“He is making the far part of his circle now,” he said. I must hold all I can, he
thought. The strain will [86] shorten his circle each time. Perhaps in an hour I will see
him. Now I must convince him and then I must kill him.
But the fish kept on circling slowly and the old man was wet with sweat and tired
deep into his bones two hours later. But the circles were much shorter now and from the
way the line slanted he could tell the fish had risen steadily while he swam.
For an hour the old man had been seeing black spots before his eyes and the sweat
salted his eyes and salted the cut over his eye and on his forehead. He was not afraid of
the black spots. They were normal at the tension that he was pulling on the line. Twice,
though, he had felt faint and dizzy and that had worried him.
“I could not fail myself and die on a fish like this,” he said. “Now that I have him
coming so beautifully, God help me endure. I’ll say a hundred Our Fathers and a hundred
Hail Marys. But I cannot say them now.
Consider them said, he thought. I’ll say them later. Just then he felt a sudden
banging and jerking on the line he held with his two hands. It was sharp and hard-feeling
and heavy.
- 32 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
He is hitting the wire leader with his spear, he [87] thought. That was bound to come.
He had to do that. It may make him jump though and I would rather he stayed circling
now. The jumps were necessary for him to take air. But after that each one can widen the
opening of the hook wound and he can throw the hook.
“Don’t jump, fish,” he said. “Don’t jump.”
The fish hit the wire several times more and each time he shook his head the old
man gave up a little line.
I must hold his pain where it is, he thought. Mine does not matter. I can control
mine. But his pain could drive him mad.
After a while the fish stopped beating at the wire and started circling slowly again.
The old man was gaining line steadily now. But he felt faint again. He lifted some sea
water with his left hand and put it on his head. Then he put more on and rubbed the back
of his neck.
“I have no cramps,” he said. “He’ll be up soon and I can last. You have to last. Don’t
even speak of it.”
He kneeled against the bow and, for a moment, slipped the line over his back again.
I’ll rest now while he goes out on the circle and then stand up and work on him when he
comes in, he decided.
[88] It was a great temptation to rest in the bow and let the fish make one circle by
himself without recovering any line. But when the strain showed the fish had turned to
come toward the boat, the old man rose to his feet and started the pivoting and the
weaving pulling that brought in all the line he gained.
I’m tireder than I have ever been, he thought, and now the trade wind is rising. But
that will be good to take him in with. I need that badly.
“I’ll rest on the next turn as he goes out,” he said. “I feel much better. Then in two or
three turns more I will have him.”
His straw hat was far on the back of his head and he sank down into the bow with the
pull of the line as he felt the fish turn.
You work now, fish, he thought. I’ll take you at the turn.
The sea had risen considerably. But it was a fair-weather breeze and he had to have it
to get home.
“I’ll just steer south and west,” he said. “A man is never lost at sea and it is a long
island.”
It was on the third turn that he saw the fish first.
He saw him first as a dark shadow that took so long [89] to pass under the boat that
he could not believe its length.
- 33 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“No,” he said. “He can’t be that big.”
But he was that big and at the end of this circle he came to the surface only thirty
yards away and the man saw his tail out of water. It was higher than a big scythe blade
and a very pale lavender above the dark blue water. It raked back and as the fish swam
just below the surface the old man could see his huge bulk and the purple stripes that
banded him. His dorsal fin was down and his huge pectorals were spread wide.
On this circle the old man could see the fish’s eye and the two gray sucking fish that
swain around him. Sometimes they attached themselves to him. Sometimes they darted
off. Sometimes they would swim easily in his shadow. They were each over three feet long
and when they swam fast they lashed their whole bodies like eels.
The old man was sweating now but from something else besides the sun. On each
calm placid turn the fish made he was gaining line and he was sure that in two turns
more he would have a chance to get the harpoon in.
[90] But I must get him close, close, close, he thought. I mustn’t try for the head. I
must get the heart.
“Be calm and strong, old man,” he said.
On the next circle the fish’s beck was out but he was a little too far from the boat. On
the next circle he was still too far away but he was higher out of water and the old man
was sure that by gaining some more line he could have him alongside.
He had rigged his harpoon long before and its coil of light rope was in a round basket
and the end was made fast to the bitt in the bow.
The fish was coming in on his circle now calm and beautiful looking and only his
great tail moving. The old man pulled on him all that he could to bring him closer. For
just a moment the fish turned a little on his side. Then he straightened himself and began
another circle.
“I moved him,” the old man said. “I moved him then.”
He felt faint again now but he held on the great fish all the strain that he could. I
moved him, he thought. Maybe this time I can get him over. Pull, hands, he thought.
Hold up, legs. Last for me, head. Last for me. You never went. This time I’ll pull him over.
[91] But when he put all of his effort on, starting it well out before the fish came
alongside and pulling with all his strength, the fish pulled part way over and then righted
himself and swam away.
“Fish,” the old man said. “Fish, you are going to have to die anyway. Do you have to
kill me too?”
That way nothing is accomplished, he thought. His mouth was too dry to speak but
he could not reach for the water now. I must get him alongside this time, he thought. I
am not good for many more turns. Yes you are, he told himself. You’re good for ever.
- 34 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
On the next turn, he nearly had him. But again the fish righted himself and swam
slowly away.
You are killing me, fish, the old man thought. But you have a right to. Never have I
seen a greater, or more beautiful, or a calmer or more noble thing than you, brother.
Come on and kill me. I do not care who kills who.
Now you are getting confused in the head, he thought. You must keep your head
clear. Keep your head clear and know how to suffer like a man. Or a fish, he thought.
“Clear up, head,” he said in a voice he could hardly hear. “Clear up.”
[92] Twice more it was the same on the turns. I do not know, the old man thought.
He had been on the point of feeling himself go each time. I do not know. But I will try it
once more. He tried it once more and he felt himself going when he turned the fish. The
fish righted himself and swam off again slowly with the great tail weaving in the air. I’ll
try it again, the old man promised, although his hands were mushy now and he could
only see well in flashes. He tried it again and it was the same. So he thought, and he felt
himself going before he started; I will try it once again.
He took all his pain and what was left of his strength and his long gone pride and he
put it against the fish’s agony and the fish came over onto his side and swam gently on his
side, his bill almost touching the planking of the skiff and started to pass the boat, long,
deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and interminable in the water.
The old man dropped the line and put his foot on it and lifted the harpoon as high as
he could and drove it down with all his strength, and more strength he had [93] just
summoned, into the fish’s side just behind the great chest fin that rose high in the air to
the altitude of the man’s chest. He felt the iron go in and he leaned on it and drove it
further and then pushed all his weight after it.
Then the fish came alive, with his death in him, and rose high out of the water
showing all his great length and width and all his power and his beauty. He seemed to
hang in the air above the old man in the skiff. Then he fell into the water with a crash that
sent spray over the old man and over all of the skiff.
The old man felt faint and sick and he could not see well. But he cleared the harpoon
line and let it run slowly through his raw hands and, when he could see, he saw the fish
was on his back with his silver belly up. The shaft of the harpoon was projecting at an
angle from the fish’s shoulder and the sea was discolouring with the red of the blood from
his heart. First it was dark as a shoal in the blue water that was more than a mile deep.
Then it spread like a cloud. The fish was silvery and still and floated with the waves.
The old man looked carefully in the glimpse of vision that he had. Then he took two
turns of the harpoon [94] line around the bitt in the bow and hid his head on his hands.
“Keep my head dear,” he said against the wood of the bow. “I am a tired old man. But
I have killed this fish which is my brother and now I must do the slave work.”
Now I must prepare the nooses and the rope to lash him alongside, he thought. Even
if we were two and swamped her to load him and bailed her out, this skiff would never
- 35 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
hold him. I must prepare everything, then bring him in and lash him well and step the
mast and set sail for home.
He started to pull the fish in to have him alongside so that he could pass a line
through his gills and out his mouth and make his head fast alongside the bow. I want to
see him, he thought, and to touch and to feel him. He is my fortune, he thought. But that
is not why I wish to feel him. I think I felt his heart, he thought. When I pushed on the
harpoon shaft the second time. Bring him in now and make him fast and get the noose
around his tail and another around his middle to bind him to the skiff.
“Get to work, old man,” he said. He took a very [95] small drink of the water. “There
is very much slave work to be done now that the fight is over.”
He looked up at the sky and then out to his fish. He looked at the sun carefully. It is
not much more than noon, he thought. And the trade wind is rising. The lines all mean
nothing now. The boy and I will splice them when we are home.
“Come on, fish,” he said. But the fish did not come.
Instead he lay there wallowing now in the seas and the old man pulled the skiff upon
to him.
When he was even with him and had the fish’s head against the bow he could not
believe his size. But he untied the harpoon rope from the bitt, passed it through the fish’s
gills and out his jaws, made a turn around his sword then passed the rope through the
other gill, made another turn around the bill and knotted the double rope and made it
fast to the bitt in the bow. He cut the rope then and went astern to noose the tail. The fish
had turned silver from his original purple and silver, and the stripes showed the same
pale violet colour as his tail. They were wider than a man’s hand with his fingers spread
and the fish’s eye looked as detached as the mirrors in a periscope or as a saint in a
procession.
[96] “It was the only way to kill him,” the old man said. He was feeling better since
the water and he knew he would not go away and his head was clear. He’s over fifteen
hundred pounds the way he is, he thought. Maybe much more. If he dresses out
two-thirds of that at thirty cents a pound?
“I need a pencil for that,” he said. “My head is not that clear. But I think the great
DiMaggio would be proud of me today. I had no bone spurs. But the hands and the back
hurt truly.” I wonder what a bone spur is, he thought. Maybe we have them without
knowing of it.
He made the fish fast to bow and stern and to the middle thwart. He was so big it
was like lashing a much bigger skiff alongside. He cut a piece of line and tied the fish’s
lower jaw against his bill so his mouth would not open and they would sail as cleanly as
possible. Then he stepped the mast and, with the stick that was his gaff and with his
boom rigged, the patched sail drew, the boat began to move, and half lying in the stern he
sailed south-west.
He did not need a compass to tell him where southwest was. He only needed the feel
- 36 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
of the trade wind and the drawing of the sail. I better put a small line [97] out with a
spoon on it and try and get something to eat and drink for the moisture. But he could not
find a spoon and his sardines were rotten. So he hooked a patch of yellow Gulf weed with
the gaff as they passed and shook it so that the small shrimps that were in it fell onto the
planking of the skiff. There were more than a dozen of them and they jumped and kicked
like sand fleas. The old man pinched their heads off with his thumb and forefinger and
ate them chewing up the shells and the tails. They were very tiny but he knew they were
nourishing and they tasted good.
The old man still had two drinks of water in the bottle and he used half of one after
he had eaten the shrimps. The skiff was sailing well considering the handicaps and he
steered with the tiller under his arm. He could see the fish and he had only to look at his
hands and feel his back against the stern to know that this had truly happened and was
not a dream. At one time when he was feeling so badly toward the end, he had thought
perhaps it was a dream. Then when he had seen the fish come out of the water and hang
motionless in the sky before he fell, he was sure there was some great strangeness and he
could not believe it.
[98] Then he could not see well, although now he saw as well as ever. Now he knew
there was the fish and his hands and back were no dream. The hands cure quickly, he
thought. I bled them clean and the salt water will heal them. The dark water of the true
gulf is the greatest healer that there is. All I must do is keep the head clear. The hands
have done their work and we sail well. With his mouth shut and his tail straight up and
down we sail like brothers. Then his head started to become a little unclear and he
thought, is he bringing me in or am I bringing him in? If I were towing him behind there
would be no question. Nor if the fish were in the skiff, with all dignity gone, there would
be no question either. But they were sailing together lashed side by side and the old man
thought, let him bring me in if it pleases him. I am only better than him through trickery
and he meant me no harm.
They sailed well and the old man soaked his hands in the salt water and tried to keep
his head clear. There were high cumulus clouds and enough cirrus above them so that the
old man knew the breeze would last all night. The old man looked at the fish constantly
[99] to make sure it was true. It was an hour before the first shark hit him.
The shark was not an accident. He had come up from deep down in the water as the
dark cloud of blood had settled and dispersed in the mile deep sea. He had come up so
fast and absolutely without caution that he broke the surface of the blue water and was in
the sun. Then he fell back into the sea and picked up the scent and started swimming on
the course the skiff and the fish had taken.
Sometimes he lost the scent. But he would pick it up again, or have just a trace of it,
and he swam fast and hard on the course. He was a very big Make shark built to swim as
fast as the fastest fish in the sea and everything about him was beautiful except his jaws.
His back was as blue as a sword fish’s and his belly was silver and his hide was smooth
and handsome. He was built as a sword fish except for his huge jaws which were tight
shut now as he swam fast, just under the surface with his high dorsal fin knifing through
the water without wavering. Inside the closed double lip of his jaws all of his eight rows of
teeth were slanted inwards. They were not the ordinary pyramid-shaped teeth of most
- 37 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
sharks. They were shaped like a man’s [100] fingers when they are crisped like claws.
They were nearly as long as the fingers of the old man and they had razor-sharp cutting
edges on both sides. This was a fish built to feed on all the fishes in the sea, that were so
fast and strong and well armed that they had no other enemy. Now he speeded up as he
smelled the fresher scent and his blue dorsal fin cut the water.
When the old man saw him coming he knew that this was a shark that had no fear at
all and would do exactly what he wished. He prepared the harpoon and made the rope
fast while he watched the shark come on. The rope was short as it lacked what he had cut
away to lash the fish.
The old man’s head was clear and good now and he was full of resolution but he had
little hope. It was too good to last, he thought. He took one look at the great fish as he
watched the shark close in. It might as well have been a dream, he thought. I cannot keep
him from hitting me but maybe I can get him. Dentuso, he thought. Bad luck to your
mother.
The shark closed fast astern and when he hit the fish the old man saw his mouth
open and his strange eyes and the clicking chop of the teeth as he drove forward in the
meat just above the tail. The shark’s head [101] was out of water and his back was coming
out and the old man could hear the noise of skin and flesh ripping on the big fish when he
rammed the harpoon down onto the shark’s head at a spot where the line between his
eyes intersected with the line that ran straight back from his nose. There were no such
lines. There was only the heavy sharp blue head and the big eyes and the clicking,
thrusting all-swallowing jaws. But that was the location of the brain and the old man hit
it. He hit it with his blood mushed hands driving a good harpoon with all his strength. He
hit it without hope but with resolution and complete malignancy.
The shark swung over and the old man saw his eye was not alive and then he swung
over once again, wrapping himself in two loops of the rope. The old man knew that he
was dead but the shark would not accept it. Then, on his back, with his tail lashing and
his jaws clicking, the shark plowed over the water as a speedboat does. The water was
white where his tail beat it and three-quarters of his body was clear above the water when
the rope came taut, shivered, and then snapped. The shark lay quietly for a little while on
the surface and the old man watched him. Then he went down very slowly.
[102] “He took about forty pounds,” the old man said aloud. He took my harpoon too
and all the rope, he thought, and now my fish bleeds again and there will be others. He
did not like to look at the fish anymore since he had been mutilated. When the fish had
been hit it was as though he himself were hit. But I killed the shark that hit my fish, he
thought. And he was the biggest dentuso that I have ever seen. And God knows that I
have seen big ones. It was too good to last, he thought. I wish it had been a dream now
and that I had never hooked the fish and was alone in bed on the newspapers.
“But man is not made for defeat,” he said. “A man can be destroyed but not
defeated.” I am sorry that I killed the fish though, he thought. Now the bad time is
coming and I do not even have the harpoon. The dentuso is cruel and able and strong and
intelligent. But I was more intelligent than he was. Perhaps not, he thought. Perhaps I
was only better armed.
- 38 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“Don’t think, old man,” he said aloud. “Sail on this course and take it when it comes.
But I must think, he thought. Because it is all I have left. That and baseball. I wonder
how the great [103] DiMaggio would have liked the way I hit him in the brain? It was no
great thing, he thought. Any man could do it. But do you think my hands were as great a
handicap as the bone spurs? I cannot know. I never had anything wrong with my heel
except the time the sting ray stung it when I stepped on him when swimming and
paralyzed the lower leg and made the unbearable pain.
“Think about something cheerful, old man,” he said. “Every minute now you are
closer to home. You sail lighter for the loss of forty pounds.”
He knew quite well the pattern of what could happen when he reached the inner part
of the current. But there was nothing to be done now.
“Yes there is,” he said aloud. “I can lash my knife to the butt of one of the oars.”
So he did that with the tiller under his arm and the sheet of the sail under his foot.
“Now,” he said. “I am still an old man. But I am not unarmed.”
The breeze was fresh now and he sailed on well. He watched only the forward part of
the fish and some of his hope returned.
It is silly not to hope, he thought. Besides I believe [104] it is a sin. Do not think
about sin, he thought. There are enough problems now without sin. Also I have no
understanding of it.
I have no understanding of it and I am not sure that I believe in it. Perhaps it was a
sin to kill the fish. I suppose it was even though I did it to keep me alive and feed many
people. But then everything is a sin. Do not think about sin. It is much too late for that
and there are people who are paid to do it. Let them think about it. You were born to be a
fisherman as the fish was born to be a fish. San Pedro was a fisherman as was the father
of the great DiMaggio.
But he liked to think about all things that he was involved in and since there was
nothing to read and he did not have a radio, he thought much and he kept on thinking
about sin. You did not kill the fish only to keep alive and to sell for food, he thought. You
killed him for pride and because you are a fisherman. You loved him when he was alive
and you loved him after. If you love him, it is not a sin to kill him. Or is it more?
“You think too much, old man,” he said aloud.
But you enjoyed killing the dentuso, he thought. He lives on the live fish as you do.
He is not a scavenger [105] nor just a moving appetite as some sharks are. He is beautiful
and noble and knows no fear of anything.
“I killed him in self-defense,” the old man said aloud. “And I killed him well.”
Besides, he thought, everything kills everything else in some way. Fishing kills me
exactly as it keeps me alive. The boy keeps me alive, he thought. I must not deceive
- 39 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
myself too much.
He leaned over the side and pulled loose a piece of the meat of the fish where the
shark had cut him. He chewed it and noted its quality and its good taste. It was firm and
juicy, like meat, but it was not red. There was no stringiness in it and he knew that it
would bring the highest price In the market. But there was no way to keep its scent out of
the water and the old man knew that a very had time was coming.
The breeze was steady. It had backed a little further into the north-east and he knew
that meant that it would not fall off. The old man looked ahead of him but he could see no
sails nor could he see the hull nor the smoke of any ship. There were only the flying fish
that went up from his bow sailing away to either side and the yellow patches of Gulf weed.
He could not even see a bird.
[106] He had sailed for two hours, resting in the stern and sometimes chewing a bit
of the meat from the marlin, trying to rest and to be strong, when he saw the first of the
two sharks. “Ay,” he said aloud. There is no translation for this word and perhaps it is
just a noise such as a man might make, involuntarily, feeling the nail go through his
hands and into the wood.
“Galanos,” he said aloud. He had seen the second fin now coming up behind the first
and had identified them as shovel-nosed sharks by the brown, triangular fin and the
sweeping movements of the tail. They had the scent and were excited and in the stupidity
of their great hunger they were losing and finding the scent in their excitement. But they
were closing all the time.
The old man made the sheet fast and jammed the tiller. Then he took up the oar with
the knife lashed to it. He lifted it as lightly as he could because his hands rebelled at the
pain. Then he opened and closed them on it lightly to loosen them. He closed them firmly
so they would take the pain now and would not flinch and watched the sharks come. He
could see their wide, flattened, shovel-pointed heads now and their white tipped wide
pectoral fins. They were hateful sharks, [107] bad smelling, scavengers as well as killers,
and when they were hungry they would bite at an oar or the rudder of a boat. It was these
sharks that would cut the turtles’ legs and flippers off when the turtles were asleep on the
surface, and they would hit a man in the water, if they were hungry, even if the man had
no smell of fish blood nor of fish slime on him.
“Ay,” the old man said. “Galanos. Come on galanos.”
They came. But they did not come as the Mako had come. One turned and went out
of sight under the skiff and the old man could feel the skiff shake as he jerked and pulled
on the fish. The other watched the old man with his slitted yellow eyes and then came in
fast with his half circle of jaws wide to hit the fish where he had already been bitten. The
line showed clearly on the top of his brown head and back where the brain joined the
spinal cord and the old man drove the knife on the oar into the juncture, withdrew it, and
drove it in again into the shark’s yellow cat-like eyes. The shark let go of the fish and slid
down, swallowing what he had taken as he died.
The skiff was still shaking with the destruction the other shark was doing to the fish
and the old man let [108] go the sheet so that the skiff would swing broadside and bring
- 40 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
the shark out from under. When he saw the shark he leaned over the side and punched at
him. He hit only meat and the hide was set hard and he barely got the knife in. The blow
hurt not only his hands but his shoulder too. But the shark came up fast with his head out
and the old man hit him squarely in the center of his flat-topped head as his nose came
out of water and lay against the fish. The old man withdrew the blade and punched the
shark exactly in the same spot again. He still hung to the fish with his jaws hooked and
the old man stabbed him in his left eye. The shark still hung there.
“No?” the old man said and he drove the blade between the vertebrae and the brain.
It was an easy shot now and he felt the cartilage sever. The old man reversed the oar and
put the blade between the shark’s jaws to open them. He twisted the blade and as the
shark slid loose he said, “Go on, galano. Slide down a mile deep. Go see your friend, or
maybe it’s your mother.”
The old man wiped the blade of his knife and laid down the oar. Then he found the
sheet and the sail filled and he brought the skiff onto her course.
[109] “They must have taken a quarter of him and of the best meat,” he said aloud. “I
wish it were a dream and that I had never hooked him. I’m sorry about it, fish. It makes
everything wrong.” He stopped and he did not want to look at the fish now. Drained of
blood and awash he looked the colour of the silver backing of a minor and his stripes still
showed.
“I shouldn’t have gone out so far, fish,” he said. “Neither for you nor for me. I’m
sorry, fish.”
Now, he said to himself. Look to the lashing on the knife and see if it has been cut.
Then get your hand in order because there still is more to come.
“I wish I had a stone for the knife,” the old man said after he had checked the lashing
on the oar butt. “I should have brought a stone.” You should have brought many things,
he thought. But you did not bring them, old man. Now is no time to think of what you do
not have. Think of what you can do with what there is.
“You give me much good counsel,” he said aloud. “I’m tired of it.” He held the tiller
under his arm and soaked both his hands in the water as the skiff drove forward. “God
knows how much that last one took,” he said.
[110] “But she’s much lighter now.” He did not want to think of the mutilated
under-side of the fish. He knew that each of the jerking bumps of the shark had been
meat torn away and that the fish now made a trail for all sharks as wide as a highway
through the sea.
He was a fish to keep a man all winter, he thought Don’t think of that. Just rest and
try to get your hands in shape to defend what is left of him. The blood smell from my
hands means nothing now with all that scent in the water. Besides they do not bleed
much. There is nothing cut that means anything. The bleeding may keep the left from
cramping.
What can I think of now? he thought. Nothing. I must think of nothing and wait for
- 41 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
the next ones. I wish it had really been a dream, he thought. But who knows? It might
have turned out well.
The next shark that came was a single shovelnose. He came like a pig to the trough if
a pig had a mouth so wide that you could put your head in it. The old man let him hit the
fish and then drove the knife on the oar don into his brain. But the shark jerked
backwards as he rolled and the knife blade snapped.
The old man settled himself to steer. He did not even watch the big shark sinking
slowly in the water, [111] showing first life-size, then small, then tiny. That always
fascinated the old man. But he did not even watch it now.
“I have the gaff now,” he said. “But it will do no good. I have the two oars and the
tiller and the short club.”
Now they have beaten me, he thought. I am too old to club sharks to death. But I will
try it as long as I have the oars and the short club and the tiller.
He put his hands in the water again to soak them. It was getting late in the afternoon
and he saw nothing but the sea and the sky. There was more wind in the sky than there
had been, and soon he hoped that he would see land.
“You’re tired, old man,” he said. “You’re tired inside.”
The sharks did not hit him again until just before sunset.
The old man saw the brown fins coming along the wide trail the fish must make in
the water.
They were not even quartering on the scent. They were headed straight for the skiff
swimming side by side. He jammed the tiller, made the sheet fast and reached under the
stem for the club. It was an oar handle [112] from a broken oar sawed off to about two
and a half feet in length. He could only use it
effectively with one hand because of the grip of the handle and he took good hold of
it with his right hand, flexing his hand on it, as he watched the sharks come. They were
both galanos.
I must let the first one get a good hold and hit him on the point of the nose or
straight across the top of the head, he thought.
The two sharks closed together and as he saw the one nearest him open his jaws and
sink them into the silver side of the fish, he raised the club high and brought it down
heavy and slamming onto the top of the shark’s broad head. He felt the rubbery solidity
as the club came down. But he felt the rigidity of bone too and he struck the shark once
more hard across the point of the nose as he slid down from the fish.
The other shark had been in and out and now came in again with his jaws wide. The
old man could see pieces of the meat of the fish spilling white from the corner of his jaws
as he bumped the fish and closed his jaws. He swung at him and hit only the head and the
shark looked at him and wrenched the meat loose. The [113] old man swung the club
- 42 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
down on him again as he slipped away to swallow and hit only the heavy solid
rubberiness.
“Come on, galano,” the old man said. “Come in again.”
The shark came in a rush and the old man hit him as he shut his jaws. He hit him
solidly and from as high up as he could raise the club. This time he felt the bone at the
base of the brain and he hit him again in the same place while the shark tore the meat
loose sluggishly and slid down from the fish.
The old man watched for him to come again but neither shark showed. Then he saw
one on the surface swimming in circles. He did not see the fin of the other.
I could not expect to kill them, he thought. I could have in my time. But I have hurt
them both badly and neither one can feel very good. If I could have used a bat with two
hands I could have killed the first one surely. Even now, he thought.
He did not want to look at the fish. He knew that half of him had been destroyed.
The sun had gone down while he had been in the fight with the sharks.
“It will be dark soon,” he said. “Then I should see [114] the glow of Havana.. If I am
too far to the eastward I will see the lights of one of the new beaches.”
I cannot be too far out now, he thought. I hope no one has been too worried. There is
only the boy to worry, of course. But I am sure he would have confidence. Many of the
older fishermen will worry. Many others too, he thought. I live in a good town.
He could not talk to the fish anymore because the fish had been ruined too badly.
Then something came into his head.
“Half fish,” he said. “Fish that you were. I am sorry that I went too far out. I ruined
us both. But we have killed many sharks, you and I, and ruined many others. How many
did you ever kill, old fish? You do not have that spear on your head for nothing.”
He liked to think of the fish and what he could do to a shark if he were swimming
free. I should have chopped the bill off to fight them with, he thought. But there was no
hatchet and then there was no knife.
But if I had, and could have lashed it to an oar butt, what a weapon. Then we might
have fought them together. What will you do now if they come in the night? What can you
do?
“Fight them,” he said. “I’ll fight them until I die.”
[115] But in the dark now and no glow showing and no lights and only the wind and
the steady pull of the sail he felt that perhaps he was already dead. He put his two hands
together and felt the palms. They were not dead and he could bring the pain of life by
simply opening and closing them. He leaned his back against the stern and knew he was
not dead. His shoulders told him.
I have all those prayers I promised if I caught the fish, he thought. But I am too tired
- 43 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
to say them now. I better get the sack and put it over my shoulders.
He lay in the stern and steered and watched for the glow to come in the sky. I have
half of him, he thought. Maybe I’ll have the luck to bring the forward half in. I should
have some luck. No, he said. You violated your luck when you went too far outside.
“Don’t be silly,” he said aloud. “And keep awake and steer. You may have much luck
yet.”
“I’d like to buy some if there’s any place they sell it,” he said.
What could I buy it with? he asked himself. Could I buy it with a lost harpoon and a
broken knife and two bad hands?
“You might,” he said. “You tried to buy it with [116] eighty-four days at sea. They
nearly sold it to you too.”
I must not think nonsense, he thought. Luck is a thing that comes in many forms and
who can recognize her? I would take some though in any form and pay what they asked. I
wish I could see the glow from the lights, he thought. I wish too many things. But that is
the thing I wish for now. He tried to settle more comfortably to steer and from his pain he
knew he was not dead.
He saw the reflected glare of the lights of the city at what must have been around ten
o’clock at night. They were only perceptible at first as the light is in the sky before the
moon rises. Then they were steady to see across the ocean which was rough now with the
increasing breeze. He steered inside of the glow and he thought that now, soon, he must
hit the edge of the stream.
Now it is over, he thought. They will probably hit me again. But what can a man do
against them in the dark without a weapon?
He was stiff and sore now and his wounds and all of the strained parts of his body
hurt with the cold of the night. I hope I do not have to fight again, he thought. I hope so
much I do not have to fight again.
[117] But by midnight he fought and this time he knew the fight was useless. They
came in a pack and he could only see the lines in the water that their fins made and their
phosphorescence as they threw themselves on the fish. He clubbed at heads and heard
the jaws chop and the shaking of the skiff as they took hold below. He clubbed
desperately at what he could only feel and hear and he felt something seize the club and it
was gone.
He jerked the tiller free from the rudder and beat and chopped with it, holding it in
both hands and driving it down again and again. But they were up to the bow now and
driving in one after the other and together, tearing off the pieces of meat that showed
glowing below the sea as they turned to come once more.
One came, finally, against the head itself and he knew that it was over. He swung the
tiller across the shark’s head where the jaws were caught in the heaviness of the fish’s
head which would not tear. He swung it once and twice and again. He heard the tiller
- 44 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
break and he lunged at the shark with the splintered butt. He felt it go in and knowing it
was sharp he drove it in again. The shark let go and rolled away. That was the [118] last
shark of the pack that came. There was nothing more for them to eat.
The old man could hardly breathe now and he felt a strange taste in his mouth. It
was coppery and sweet and he was afraid of it for a moment. But there was not much of
it.
He spat into the ocean and said, “Eat that, galanos. And make a dream you’ve killed
a man.”
He knew he was beaten now finally and without remedy and he went back to the
stern and found the jagged end of the tiller would fit in the slot of the rudder well enough
for him to steer. He settled the sack around his shoulders and put the skiff on her course.
He sailed lightly now and he had no thoughts nor any feelings of any kind. He was past
everything now and he sailed the skiff to make his home port as well and as intelligently
as he could. In the night sharks hit the carcass as someone might pick up crumbs from
the table. The old man paid no attention to them and did not pay any attention to
anything except steering. He only noticed how lightly and bow well the skiff sailed now
there was no great weight beside her.
[119] She’s good, he thought. She is sound and not harmed in any way except for the
tiller. That is easily replaced. He could feel he was inside the current now and he could
see the lights of the beach colonies along the shore. He knew where he was now and it
was nothing to get home.
The wind is our friend, anyway, he thought. Then he added, sometimes. And the
great sea with our friends and our enemies. And bed, he thought. Bed is my friend. Just
bed, he thought. Bed will be a great thing. It is easy when you are beaten, he thought. I
never knew how easy it was. And what beat you, he thought.
“Nothing,” he said aloud. “I went out too far.”
When he sailed into the little harbour the lights of the Terrace were out and he knew
everyone was in bed. The breeze had risen steadily and was blowing strongly now. It was
quiet in the harbour though and he sailed up onto the little patch of shingle below the
rocks. There was no one to help him so he pulled the boat up as far as he could. Then he
stepped out and made her fast to a rock.
[120] He unstepped the mast and furled the sail and tied it. Then he shouldered the
mast and started to climb. It was then he knew the depth of his tiredness. He stopped for
a moment and looked back and saw in the reflection from the street light the great tail of
the fish standing up well behind the skiff’s stern. He saw the white naked line of his
backbone and the dark mass of the head with the projecting bill and all the nakedness
between.
He started to climb again and at the top he fell and lay for some time with the mast
across his shoulder. He tried to get up. But it was too difficult and he sat there with the
mast on his shoulder and looked at the road. A cat passed on the far side going about its
business and the old man watched it. Then he just watched the road.
- 45 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
Finally he put the mast down and stood up. He picked the mast up and put it on his
shoulder and started up the road. He had to sit down five times before he reached his
shack.
Inside the shack he leaned the mast against the wall. In the dark he found a water
bottle and took a drink. Then he lay down on the bed. He pulled the blanket [121] over his
shoulders and then over his back and legs and he slept face down on the newspapers with
his arms out straight and the palms of his hands up.
He was asleep when the boy looked in the door in the morning. It was blowing so
hard that the drifting-boats would not be going out and the boy had slept late and then
come to the old man’s shack as he had come each morning. The boy saw that the old man
was breathing and then he saw the old man’s hands and he started to cry. He went out
very quietly to go to bring some coffee and all the way down the road he was crying.
Many fishermen were around the skiff looking at what was lashed beside it and one
was in the water, his trousers rolled up, measuring the skeleton with a length of line.
The boy did not go down. He had been there before and one of the fishermen was
looking after the skiff for him. “How is he?” one of the fishermen shouted. “Sleeping,” the
boy called. He did not care that they saw him crying. “Let no one disturb him.” “He was
eighteen feet from nose to tail,” the fisherman who was measuring him called.
[122] “I believe it,” the boy said.
He went into the Terrace and asked for a can of coffee.
“Hot and with plenty of milk and sugar in it.”
“Anything more?”
“No. Afterwards I will see what he can eat.”
“What a fish it was,” the proprietor said. “There has never been such a fish. Those
were two fine fish you took yesterday too.” “Damn my fish,” the boy said and he started to
cry again.
“Do you want a drink of any kind?” the proprietor asked.
“No,” the boy said. “Tell them not to bother Santiago. I’ll be back.”
“Tell him how sorry I am.”
“Thanks,” the boy said.
The boy carried the hot can of coffee up to the old man’s shack and sat by him until
he woke. Once it looked as though he were waking. But he had gone back into heavy sleep
and the boy had gone across the road to borrow some wood to heat the coffee.
Finally the old man woke.
[123] “Don’t sit up,” the boy said. “Drink this.”
- 46 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
He poured some of the coffee in a glass.
The old man took it and drank it.
“They beat me, Manolin,” he said. “They truly beat me.”
“He didn’t beat you. Not the fish.”
“No. Truly. It was afterwards.”
“Pedrico is looking after the skiff and the gear. What do you want done with the
head?”
“Let Pedrico chop it up to use in fish traps.”
“And the spear?”
“You keep it if you want it.”
“I want it,” the boy said. “Now we must make our plans about the other things.”
“Did they search for me?”
“Of course. With coast guard and with planes.”
“The ocean is very big and a skiff is small and hard to see,” the old man said. He
noticed how pleasant it was to have someone to talk to instead of speaking only to
himself and to the sea. “I missed you,” he said. “What did you catch?” “One the first day.
One the second and two the third.”
[124] “Very good.”
“Now we fish together again.”
“No. I am not lucky. I am not lucky anymore.”
“The hell with luck,” the boy said. “I’ll bring the luck with me.”
“What will your family say?”
“I do not care. I caught two yesterday. But we will fish together now for I still have
much to learn.”
“We must get a good killing lance and always have it on board. You can make the
blade from a spring leaf from an old Ford. We can grind it in Guanabacoa. It should be
sharp and not tempered so it will break. My knife broke.”
“I’ll get another knife and have the spring ground.”
How many days of heavy brisa have we?”
“Maybe three. Maybe more.”
“I will have everything in order,” the boy said. “You get your hands well old man.”
- 47 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
“I know how to care for them. In the night I spat something strange and felt
something in my chest was broken.” “Get that well too,” the boy said. “Lie down, old man,
and I will bring you your clean shirt. And something to eat.”
[125] “Bring any of the papers of the time that I was gone,” the old man said.
“You must get well fast for there is much that I can learn and you can teach me
everything.
How much did you suffer?” “Plenty,” the old man said.
“I’ll bring the food and the papers,” the boy said. “Rest well, old man. I will bring
stuff from the drugstore for your hands.”
“Don’t forget to tell Pedrico the head is his.”
“No. I will remember.”
As the boy went out the door and down the worn coral rock road he was crying again.
That afternoon there was a party of tourists at the Terrace and looking down in the
water among the empty beer cans and dead barracudas a woman saw a great long white
spine with a huge tail at the end that lifted and swung with the tide while the east wind
blew a heavy steady sea outside the entrance to the harbour.
“What’s that?” she asked a waiter and pointed to the long backbone of the great fish
that was now just garbage waiting to go out with the tide.
“Tiburon,” the waiter said. “Shark.” He was meaning to explain what had happened.
“I didn’t know sharks had such handsome, beautifully formed tails.”
“I didn’t either,” her male companion said.
Up the road, in his shack, the old man was sleeping again. He was still sleeping on
his face and the boy was sitting by him watching him. The old man was dreaming about
the lions.
THE END.
- 48 -The Old Man and the Sea
Asiaing.com
Ernest Hemingway, Writer
• Born: 21 July 1899
• Birthplace: Oak Park, Illinois
• Died: 2 July 1961 (suicide)
• Best Known As: Famously manly author of For Whom the Bell
Tolls
Hemingway is one of the 20th century's most famous American writers. His
books include The Sun Also Rises (1926), A Farewell to Arms (1929), and For
Whom the Bell Tolls (1940). Hemingway's plainspoken no-frills writing style
became so famous that it was (and is) frequently parodied. His dashing
machismo was almost as famous as his writing: he lived in Paris, Cuba and Key
West, fancied bullfighting and big game hunting, and served as a war
correspondent in WWII and the Spanish Civil War. He sealed his own notoriety
when he killed himself with a shotgun in 1961.
Hemingway was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1954...
Hemingway is sometimes called by his familiar nickname "Papa"... His
birthdate is sometimes listed in error as 1898. According to a 1954 article in the
New York Times, "In most reference books and in his own conversation he is
one year older because he gave 1898 as his birth date when he tried to enlist [in
the army] early in 1917, and stuck to that date ever since"... Hemingway's father
also committed suicide, shooting himself with a Civil War pistol in 1928.

THE SUN ALSO RISES
by Ernest Hemingway
Contents:
Flyleaf
Book One
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Book Two
8 9 10 11 12 13
Book Three
19
About the Author
14
15
16
17
18
http://www.en8848.com.cnFlyleaf:
Published in 1926 to explosive acclaim, _The Sun Also Rises_ stands as perhaps the most impressive first
novel ever written by an American writer.
A roman à clef about a group of American and English expatriates on an
excursion from Paris's Left Bank to Pamplona for the July fiesta and its climactic bull fight, a journey from the
center of a civilization spirtually bankrupted by the First World War to a vital, God-haunted world in which faith
and honor have yet to lose their currency, the novel captured for the generation that would come to be called "Lost"
the spirit of its age, and marked Ernest Hemingway as the preeminent writer of his time.
This book is for Hadley
and for John Hadley Nicanor
"You are all a lost generation_."
--GERTRUDE STEIN IN CONVERSATION
"One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh; but the earth abideth forever... The sun also ariseth,
and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to the place where he arose... The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth
about unto the north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according to his circuits. .. . All the
rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return
again_."
-- ECCLESIASTES
http://www.en8848.com.cnBOOK ONE
1
Robert Cohn was once middleweight boxing champion of Princeton. Do not think that I am very much
impressed by that as a boxing title, but it meant a lot to Cohn. He cared nothing for boxing, in fact he disliked it, but
he learned it painfully and thoroughly to counteract the feeling of inferiority and shyness he had felt on being
treated as a Jew at Princeton. There was a certain inner comfort in knowing he could knock down anybody who was
snooty to him, although, being very shy and a thoroughly nice boy, he never fought except in the gym. He was
Spider Kelly's star pupil. Spider Kelly taught all his young gentlemen to box like featherweights, no matter whether
they weighed one hundred and five or two hundred and five pounds. But it seemed to fit Cohn. He was really very
fast. He was so good that Spider promptly overmatched him and got his nose permanently flattened. This increased
Cohn's distaste for boxing, but it gave him a certain satisfaction of some strange sort, and it certainly improved his
nose. In his last year at Princeton he read too much and took to wearing spectacles. I never met any one of his class
who remembered him. They did not even remember that he was middleweight boxing champion.
I mistrust all frank and simple people, especially when their stories hold together, and I always had a suspicion
that perhaps Robert Cohn had never been middleweight boxing champion, and that perhaps a horse had stepped on
his face, or that maybe his mother had been frightened or seen something, or that he had, maybe, bumped into
something as a young child, but I finally had somebody verify the story from Spider Kelly. Spider Kelly not only
remembered Cohn. He had often wondered what had become of him.
Robert Cohn was a member, through his father, of one of the richest Jewish families in New York, and through
his mother of one of the oldest. At the military school where he prepped for Princeton, and played a very good end
on the football team, no one had made him race-conscious. No one had ever made him feel he was a Jew, and hence
any different from anybody else, until he went to Princeton. He was a nice boy, a friendly boy, and very shy, and it
made him bitter. He took it out in boxing, and he came out of Princeton with painful self-consciousness and the
flattened nose, and was married by the first girl who was nice to him. He was married five years, had three children,
lost most of the fifty thousand dollars his father left him, the balance of the estate having gone to his mother,
hardened into a rather unattractive mould under domestic unhappiness with a rich wife; and just when he had made
up his mind to leave his wife she left him and went off with a miniature-painter. As he had been thinking for months
about leaving his wife and had not done it because it would be too cruel to deprive her of himself, her departure was
a very healthful shock.
The divorce was arranged and Robert Cohn went out to the Coast. In California he fell among literary people
and, as he still had a little of the fifty thousand left, in a short time he was backing a review of the Arts. The review
commenced publication in Carmel, California, and finished in Provincetown, Massachusetts. By that time Cohn,
who had been regarded purely as an angel, and whose name had appeared on the editorial page merely as a member
of the advisory board, had become the sole editor. It was his money and he discovered he liked the authority of
editing. He was sorry when the magazine became too expensive and he had to give it up.
By that time, though, he had other things to worry about. He had been taken in hand by a lady who hoped to
rise with the magazine. She was very forceful, and Cohn never had a chance of not being taken in hand. Also he was
sure that he loved her. When this lady saw that the magazine was not going to rise, she became a little disgusted
with Cohn and decided that she might as well get what there was to get while there was still something available, so
http://www.en8848.com.cnshe urged that they go to Europe, where Cohn could write. They came to Europe, where the lady had been educated,
and stayed three years. During these three years, the first spent in travel, the last two in Paris, Robert Cohn had two
friends, Braddocks and myself. Braddocks was his literary friend. I was his tennis friend.
The lady who had him, her name was Frances, found toward the end of the second year that her looks were
going, and her attitude toward Robert changed from one of careless possession and exploitation to the absolute
determination that he should marry her. During this time Robert's mother had settled an allowance on him, about
three hundred dollars a month. During two years and a half I do not believe that Robert Cohn looked at another
woman. He was fairly happy, except that, like many people living in Europe, he would rather have been in America,
and he had discovered writing. He wrote a novel, and it was not really such a bad novel as the critics later called it,
although it was a very poor novel. He read many books, played bridge, played tennis, and boxed at a local
gymnasium.
I first became aware of his lady's attitude toward him one night after the three of us had dined together. We
had dined at l'Avenue's and afterward went to the Café de Versailles for coffee. We had several _fines_ after the
coffee, and I said I must be going. Cohn had been talking about the two of us going off somewhere on a weekend
trip. He wanted to get out of town and get in a good walk. I suggested we fly to Strasbourg and walk up to Saint
Odile, or somewhere or other in Alsace. "I know a girl in Strasbourg who can show us the town," I said.
Somebody kicked me under the table. I thought it was accidental and went on: "She's been there two years and
knows everything there is to know about the town. She's a swell girl."
I was kicked again under the table and, looking, saw Frances, Robert's lady, her chin lifting and her face
hardening.
"Hell," I said, "why go to Strasbourg? We could go up to Bruges, or to the Ardennes."
Cohn looked relieved. I was not kicked again. I said good-night and went out. Cohn said he wanted to buy a
paper and would walk to the corner with me. "For God's sake," he said, "why did you say that about that girl in
Strasbourg for? Didn't you see Frances?"
"No, why should I? If I know an American girl that lives in Strasbourg what the hell is it to Frances?"
"It doesn't make any difference. Any girl. I couldn't go, that would be all."
"Don't be silly."
"You don't know Frances. Any girl at all. Didn't you see the way she looked?"
"Oh, well," I said, "let's go to Senlis."
"Don't get sore."
"I'm not sore. Senlis is a good place and we can stay at the Grand Cerf and take a hike in the woods and come
home."
"Good, that will be fine."
"Well, I'll see you to-morrow at the courts," I said.
"Good-night, Jake," he said, and started back to the café.
"You forgot to get your paper," I said.
"That's so." He walked with me up to the kiosque at the corner. "You are not sore, are you, Jake?" He turned
with the paper in his hand.
"No, why should I be?"
"See you at tennis," he said. I watched him walk back to the café holding his paper. I rather liked him and
evidently she led him quite a life.
http://www.en8848.com.cn2
That winter Robert Cohn went over to America with his novel, and it was accepted by a fairly good publisher.
His going made an awful row I heard, and I think that was where Frances lost him, because several women were
nice to him in New York, and when he came back he was quite changed. He was more enthusiastic about America
than ever, and he was not so simple, and he was not so nice. The publishers had praised his novel pretty highly and
it rather went to his head. Then several women had put themselves out to be nice to him, and his horizons had all
shifted. For four years his horizon had been absolutely limited to his wife. For three years, or almost three years, he
had never seen beyond Frances. I am sure he had never been in love in his life.
He had married on the rebound from the rotten time he had in college, and Frances took him on the rebound
from his discovery that he had not been everything to his first wife. He was not in love yet but he realized that he
was an attractive quantity to women, and that the fact of a woman caring for him and wanting to live with him was
not simply a divine miracle. This changed him so that he was not so pleasant to have around. Also, playing for
higher stakes than he could afford in some rather steep bridge games with his New York connections, he had held
cards and won several hundred dollars. It made him rather vain of his bridge game, and he talked several times of
how a man could always make a living at bridge if he were ever forced to.
Then there was another thing. He had been reading W. H. Hudson. That sounds like an innocent occupation,
but Cohn had read and reread "The Purple Land." "The Purple Land" is a very sinister book if read too late in life. It
recounts splendid imaginary amorous adventures of a perfect English gentleman in an intensely romantic land, the
scenery of which is very well described. For a man to take it at thirty-four as a guide-book to what life holds is
about as safe as it would be for a man of the same age to enter Wall Street direct from a French convent, equipped
with a complete set of the more practical Alger books. Cohn, I believe, took every word of "The Purple Land" as
literally as though it had been an R. G. Dun report. You understand me, he made some reservations, but on the whole
the book to him was sound. It was all that was needed to set him off. I did not realize the extent to which it had set
him off until one day he came into my office.
"Hello, Robert," I said. "Did you come in to cheer me up?"
"Would you like to go to South America, Jake?" he asked.
"No."
"Why not?"
"I don't know. I never wanted to go. Too expensive. You can see all the South Americans you want in Paris
anyway."
"They're not the real South Americans."
"They look awfully real to me."
I had a boat train to catch with a week's mail stories, and only half of them written.
"Do you know any dirt?" I asked.
"No."
"None of your exalted connections getting divorces?"
"No; listen, Jake. If I handled both our expenses, would you go to South America with me?"
"Why me?"
"You can talk Spanish. And it would be more fun with two of us."
"No," I said, "I like this town and I go to Spain in the summertime."
"All my life I've wanted to go on a trip like that," Cohn said. He sat down. "I'll be too old before I can ever do
it."
"Don't be a fool," I said. "You can go anywhere you want. You've got plenty of money."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I know. But I can't get started."
"Cheer up," I said. "All countries look just like the moving pictures."
But I felt sorry for him. He had it badly.
"I can't stand it to think my life is going so fast and I'm not really living it."
"Nobody ever lives their life all the way up except bullfighters."
"I'm not interested in bull-fighters. That's an abnormal life. I want to go back in the country in South America.
We could have a great trip."
"Did you ever think about going to British East Africa to shoot?"
"No, I wouldn't like that."
"I'd go there with you."
"No; that doesn't interest me."
"That's because you never read a book about it. Go on and read a book all full of love affairs with the beautiful
shiny black princesses."
"I want to go to South America."
He had a hard, Jewish, stubborn streak.
"Come on down-stairs and have a drink."
"Aren't you working?"
"No," I said. We went down the stairs to the café on the ground floor. I had discovered that was the best way to
get rid of friends. Once you had a drink all you had to say was: "Well, I've got to get back and get off some cables,"
and it was done. It is very important to discover graceful exits like that in the newspaper business, where it is such
an important part of the ethics that you should never seem to be working. Anyway, we went down-stairs to the bar
and had a whiskey and soda. Cohn looked at the bottles in bins around the wall. "This is a good place," he said.
"There's a lot of liquor," I agreed.
"Listen, Jake," he leaned forward on the bar. "Don't you ever get the feeling that all your life is going by and
you're not taking advantage of it? Do you realize you've lived nearly half the time you have to live already?"
"Yes, every once in a while."
"Do you know that in about thirty-five years more we'll be dead?"
"What the hell, Robert," I said. "What the hell."
"I'm serious."
"It's one thing I don't worry about," I said.
"You ought to."
"I've had plenty to worry about one time or other. I'm through worrying."
"Well, I want to go to South America."
"Listen, Robert, going to another country doesn't make any difference. I've tried all that. You can't get away
from yourself by moving from one place to another. There's nothing to that."
"But you've never been to South America."
"South America hell! If you went there the way you feel now it would be exactly the same. This is a good
town. Why don't you start living your life in Paris?"
"I'm sick of Paris, and I'm sick of the Quarter."
"Stay away from the Quarter. Cruise around by yourself and see what happens to you."
"Nothing happens to me. I walked alone all one night and nothing happened except a bicycle cop stopped me
and asked to see my papers."
"Wasn't the town nice at night?"
"I don't care for Paris."
http://www.en8848.com.cnSo there you were. I was sorry for him, but it was not a thing you could do anything about, because right away
you ran up against the two stubbornnesses: South America could fix it and he did not like Paris. He got the first idea
out of a book, and I suppose the second came out of a book too.
"Well," I said, "I've got to go up-stairs and get off some cables."
"Do you really have to go?"
"Yes, I've got to get these cables off."
"Do you mind if I come up and sit around the office?"
"No, come on up."
He sat in the outer room and read the papers, and the Editor and Publisher and I worked hard for two hours.
Then I sorted out the carbons, stamped on a by-line, put the stuff in a couple of big manila envelopes and rang for a
boy to take them to the Gare St. Lazare. I went out into the other room and there was Robert Cohn asleep in the big
chair. He was asleep with his head on his arms. I did not like to wake him up, but I wanted to lock the office and
shove off. I put my hand on his shoulder. He shook his head. "I can't do it," he said, and put his head deeper into his
arms. "I can't do it. Nothing will make me do it."
"Robert," I said, and shook him by the shoulder. He looked up. He smiled and blinked.
"Did I talk out loud just then?"
"Something. But it wasn't clear."
"God, what a rotten dream!"
"Did the typewriter put you to sleep?"
"Guess so. I didn't sleep all last night."
"What was the matter?"
"Talking," he said.
I could picture it. I have a rotten habit of picturing the bedroom scenes of my friends. We went out to the Café
Napolitain to have an _aperitif_ and watch the evening crowd on the Boulevard.
http://www.en8848.com.cn3
It was a warm spring night and I sat at a table on the terrace of the Napolitain after Robert had gone, watching
it get dark and the electric signs come on, and the red and green stop-and-go traffic-signal, and the crowd going by,
and the horse-cabs clippety-clopping along at the edge of the solid taxi traffic, and the _poules_ going by, singly and
in pairs, looking for the evening meal. I watched a good-looking girl walk past the table and watched her go up the
street and lost sight of her, and watched another, and then saw the first one coming back again. She went by once
more and I caught her eye, and she came over and sat down at the table. The waiter came up.
"Well, what will you drink?" I asked.
"Pernod."
"That's not good for little girls."
"Little girl yourself. Dites garcon, un pernod."
"A pernod for me, too."
"What's the matter?" she asked. "Going on a party?"
"Sure. Aren't you?"
"I don't know. You never know in this town."
"Don't you like Paris?"
"No."
"Why don't you go somewhere else?"
"Isn't anywhere else."
"You're happy, all right."
"Happy, hell!"
Pernod is greenish imitation absinthe. When you add water it turns milky. It tastes like licorice and it has a
good uplift, but it drops you just as far. We sat and drank it, and the girl looked sullen.
"Well," I said, "are you going to buy me a dinner?"
She grinned and I saw why she made a point of not laughing. With her mouth closed she was a rather pretty
girl. I paid for the saucers and we walked out to the street. I hailed a horse-cab and the driver pulled up at the curb.
Settled back in the slow, smoothly rolling _fiacre_ we moved up the Avenue de l'Opéra, passed the locked doors of
the shops, their windows lighted, the Avenue broad and shiny and almost deserted. The cab passed the New York
_Herald_ bureau with the window full of clocks.
"What are all the clocks for?" she asked.
"They show the hour all over America."
"Don't kid me."
We turned off the Avenue up the Rue des Pyramides, through the traffic of the Rue de Rivoli, and through a
dark gate into the Tuileries. She cuddled against me and I put my arm around her. She looked up to be kissed. She
touched me with one hand and I put her hand away.
"Never mind."
"What's the matter? You sick?"
"Yes."
"Everybody's sick. I'm sick, too."
We came out of the Tuileries into the light and crossed the Seine and then turned up the Rue des Saints Pères.
"You oughtn't to drink pernod if you're sick."
"You neither."
"It doesn't make any difference with me. It doesn't make any difference with a woman."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"What are you called?"
"Georgette. How are you called?"
"Jacob."
"That's a Flemish name."
"American too."
"You're not Flamand?"
"No, American."
"Good, I detest Flamands."
By this time we were at the restaurant. I called to the _cocher_ to stop. We got out and Georgette did not like
the looks of the place. "This is no great thing of a restaurant."
"No," I said. "Maybe you would rather go to Foyot's. Why don't you keep the cab and go on?"
I had picked her up because of a vague sentimental idea that it would be nice to eat with some one. It was a
long time since I had dined with a _poule_, and I had forgotten how dull it could be. We went into the restaurant,
passed Madame Lavigne at the desk and into a little room. Georgette cheered up a little under the food.
"It isn't bad here," she said. "It isn't chic, but the food is all right."
"Better than you eat in Liege."
"Brussels, you mean."
We had another bottle of wine and Georgette made a joke. She smiled and showed all her bad teeth, and we
touched glasses.
"You're not a bad type," she said. "It's a shame you're sick. We get on well. What's the matter with you,
anyway?"
"I got hurt in the war," I said.
"Oh, that dirty war."
We would probably have gone on and discussed the war and agreed that it was in reality a calamity for
civilization, and perhaps would have been better avoided. I was bored enough. Just then from the other room some
one called: "Barnes! I say, Barnes! Jacob Barnes!
"It's a friend calling me," I explained, and went out.
There was Braddocks at a big table with a party: Cohn, Frances Clyne, Mrs. Braddocks, several people I did
not know.
"You're coming to the dance, aren't you?" Braddocks asked.
"What dance?"
"Why, the dancings. Don't you know we've revived them?" Mrs. Braddocks put in.
"You must come, Jake. We're all going," Frances said from the end of the table. She was tall and had a smile.
"Of course, he's coming," Braddocks said. "Come in and have coffee with us, Barnes."
"Right."
"And bring your friend," said Mrs. Braddocks laughing. She was a Canadian and had all their easy social
graces.
"Thanks, we'll be in," I said. I went back to the small room.
"Who are your friends?" Georgette asked.
"Writers and artists."
"There are lots of those on this side of the river."
"Too many."
"I think so. Still, some of them make money."
"Oh, yes."
http://www.en8848.com.cnWe finished the meal and the wine. "Come on," I said. "We're going to have coffee with the others."
Georgette opened her bag, made a few passes at her face as she looked in the little mirror, re-defined her lips
with the lip-stick, and straightened her hat.
"Good," she said.
We went into the room full of people and Braddocks and the men at his table stood up.
"I wish to present my fiancée, Mademoiselle Georgette Leblanc," I said. Georgette smiled that wonderful
smile, and we shook hands all round.
"Are you related to Georgette Leblanc, the singer?" Mrs. Braddocks asked.
"Connais pas," Georgette answered.
"But you have the same name," Mrs. Braddocks insisted cordially.
"No," said Georgette. "Not at all. My name is Hobin."
"But Mr. Barnes introduced you as Mademoiselle Georgette Leblanc. Surely he did," insisted Mrs. Braddocks,
who in the excitement of talking French was liable to have no idea what she was saying.
"He's a fool," Georgette said.
"Oh, it was a joke, then," Mrs. Braddocks said.
"Yes," said Georgette. "To laugh at."
"Did you hear that, Henry?" Mrs. Braddocks called down the table to Braddocks. "Mr. Barnes introduced his
fiancee as Mademoiselle Leblanc, and her name is actually Hobin."
"Of course, darling. Mademoiselle Hobin, I've known her for a very long time."
"Oh, Mademoiselle Hobin," Frances Clyne calIed, speaking French very rapidly and not seeming so proud and
astonished as Mrs. Braddocks at its coming out really French. "Have you been in Paris long? Do you like it here?
You love Paris, do you not?"
"Who's she?" Georgette turned to me. "Do I have to talk to her?"
She turned to Frances, sitting smiling, her hands folded, her head poised on her long neck, her lips pursed
ready to start talking again.
"No, I don't like Paris. It's expensive and dirty."
"Really? I find it so extraordinarily clean. One of the cleanest cities in all Europe."
"I find it dirty."
"How strange! But perhaps you have not been here very long."
"I've been here long enough."
"But it does have nice people in it. One must grant that."
Georgette turned to me. "You have nice friends."
Frances was a little drunk and would have liked to have kept it up but the coffee came, and Lavigne with the
liqueurs, and after that we all went out and started for Braddocks's dancing-club.
The dancing-club was a _bal musette_ in the Rue de la Montagne Sainte Genevieve. Five nights a week the
working people of the Pantheon quarter danced there. One night a week it was the dancingclub. On Monday nights
it was closed. When we arrived it was quite empty, except for a policeman sitting near the door, the wife of the
proprietor back of the zinc bar, and the proprietor himself. The daughter of the house came down-stairs as we went
in. There were long benches, and tables ran across the room, and at the far end a dancing-floor.
"I wish people would come earlier," Braddocks said. The daughter came up and wanted to know what we
would drink. The proprietor got up on a high stool beside the dancing-floor and began to play the accordion. He had
a string of bells around one of his ankles and beat time with his foot as he played. Every one danced. It was hot and
we came off the floor perspiring.
"My God," Georgette said. "What a box to sweat in!"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"It's hot."
"Hot, my God!"
"Take off your hat."
"That's a good idea."
Some one asked Georgette to dance, and I went over to the bar. It was really very hot and the accordion music
was pleasant in the hot night. I drank a beer, standing in the doorway and getting the cool breath of wind from the
street. Two taxis were coming down the steep street. They both stopped in front of the Bal. A crowd of young men,
some in jerseys and some in their shirt-sleeves, got out. I could see their hands and newly washed, wavy hair in the
light from the door. The policeman standing by the door looked at me and smiled. They came in. As they went in,
under the light I saw white hands, wavy hair, white faces, grimacing, gesturing, talking. With them was Brett. She
looked very lovely and she was very much with them.
One of them saw Georgette and said: "I do declare. There is an actual harlot. I'm going to dance with her, Lett.
You watch me."
The tall dark one, called Lett, said: "Don't you be rash.".
The wavy blond one answered: "Don't you worry, dear." And with them was Brett.
I was very angry. Somehow they always made me angry. I know they are supposed to be amusing, and you
should be tolerant, but I wanted to swing on one, any one, anything to shatter that superior, simpering composure.
Instead, I walked down the street and had a beer at the bar at the next Bal. The beer was not good and I had a worse
cognac to take the taste Out of my mouth. When I came back to the Bad there was a crowd on the floor and
Georgette was dancing with the tall blond youth, who danced big-hippily, carrying his head on one side, his eyes
lifted as he danced. As soon as the music stopped another one of them asked her to dance. She had been taken up by
them. I knew then that they would all dance with her. They are like that.
I sat down at a table. Cohn was sitting there. Frances was dancing. Mrs. Braddocks brought up somebody and
introduced him as Robert Prentiss. He was from New York by way of Chicago, and was a rising new novelist. He
had some sort of an English accent. I asked him to have a drink.
"Thanks so much," he said, "I've just had one."
"Have another."
"Thanks, I will then."
We got the daughter of the house over and each had a _fine a l'eau_.
"You're from Kansas City, they tell me," he said.
"Yes."
"Do you find Paris amusing?"
"Yes."
"Really?"
I was a little drunk. Not drunk in any positive sense but just enough to be careless.
"For God's sake," I said, "yes. Don't you?"
"Oh, how charmingly you get angry," he said. "I wish I had that faculty."
I got up and walked over toward the dancing-floor. Mrs. Braddocks followed me. "Don't be cross with
Robert," she said. "He's still only a child, you know."
"I wasn't cross," I said. "I just thought perhaps I was going to throw up."
"Your fiancée is having a great success," Mrs. Braddocks looked out on the floor where Georgette was
dancing in the arms of the tall, dark one, called Lett.
"Isn't she?" I said.
"Rather," said Mrs. Braddocks.
http://www.en8848.com.cnCohn came up. "Come on, Jake," he said, "have a drink." We walked over to the bar. "What's the matter with
you? You seem all worked up over something?"
"Nothing. This whole show makes me sick is all."
Brett came up to the bar.
"Hello, you chaps."
"Hello, Brett," I said. "Why aren't you tight?"
"Never going to get tight any more. I say, give a chap a brandy and soda."
She stood holding the glass and I saw Robert Cohn looking at her. He looked a great deal as his compatriot
must have looked when he saw the promised land. Cohn, of course, was much younger. But he had that look of
eager, deserving expectation.
Brett was damned good-looking. She wore a slipover jersey sweater and a tweed skirt, and her hair was
brushed back like a boy's. She started all that. She was built with curves like the hull of a racing yacht, and you
missed none of it with that wool jersey.
"It's a fine crowd you're with, Brett," I said.
"Aren't they lovely? And you, my dear. Where did you get it?"
"At the Napolitain."
"And have you had a lovely evening?"
"Oh, priceless," I said.
Brett laughed. "It's wrong of you, Jake. It's an insult to all of us. Look at Frances there, and Jo."
This for Cohn's benefit.
"It's in restraint of trade," Brett said. She laughed again.
"You're wonderfully sober," I said.
"Yes. Aren't I? And when one's with the crowd I'm with, one can drink in such safety, too."
The music started and Robert Cohn said: "Will you dance this with me, Lady Brett?"
Brett smiled at him. "I've promised to dance this with Jacob," she laughed. "You've a hell of a biblical name,
Jake."
"How about the next?" asked Cohn.
"We're going," Brett said. "We've a date up at Montmartre."
Dancing, I looked over Brett's shoulder and saw Cohn, standing at the bar, still watching her.
"You've made a new one there," I said to her.
"Don't talk about it. Poor chap. I never knew it till just now."
"Oh, well," I said. "I suppose you like to add them up."
"Don't talk like a fool."
"You do."
"Oh, well. What if I do?"
"Nothing," I said. We were dancing to the accordion and some one was playing the banjo. It was hot and I felt
happy. We passed close to Georgette dancing with another one of them.
"What possessed you to bring her?"
"I don't know, I just brought her."
"You're getting damned romantic."
"No, bored."
"Now?"
"No, not now."
"Let's get out of here. She's well taken care of."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Do you want to?"
"Would I ask you if I didn't want to?"
We left the floor and I took my coat off a hanger on the wall and put it on. Brett stood by the bar. Cohn was
talking to her. I stopped at the bar and asked them for an envelope. The patronne found one. I took a fifty-franc note
from my pocket, put it in the envelope, sealed it, and handed it to the patronne.
"If the girl I came with asks for me, will you give her this?" I said. "If she goes out with one of those
gentlemen, will you save this for me?"
"C'est entendu, Monsieur," the patronne said. "You go now? So early?"
"Yes," I said.
We started out the door. Cohn was still talking to Brett. She said good night and took my arm. "Good night,
Cohn," I said. Outside in the street we looked for a taxi.
"You're going to lose your fifty francs," Brett said.
"Oh, yes."
"No taxis."
"We could walk up to the Pantheon and get one."
"Come on and we'll get a drink in the pub next door and send for one."
"You wouldn't walk across the street."
"Not if I could help it."
We went into the next bar and I sent a waiter for a taxi.
"Well," I said, "we're out away from them."
We stood against the tall zinc bar and did not talk and looked at each other. The waiter came and said the taxi
was outside. Brett pressed my hand hard. I gave the waiter a franc and we went out. "Where should I tell him?" I
asked.
"Oh, tell him to drive around."
I told the driver to go to the Parc Montsouris, and got in, and slammed the door. Brett was leaning back in the
corner, her eyes closed. I sat beside her. The cab started with a jerk.
"Oh, darling, I've been so miserable," Brett said.
http://www.en8848.com.cn4
The taxi went up the hill, passed the lighted square, then on into the dark, still climbing, then levelled out onto
a dark street behind St. Etienne du Mont, went smoothly down the asphalt, passed the trees and the standing bus at
the Place de la Contrescarpe, then turned onto the cobbles of the Rue Mouffetard. There were lighted bars and late
open shops on each side of the street. We were sitting apart and we jolted close together going down the old street.
Brett's hat was off. Her head was back. I saw her face in the lights from the open shops, then it was dark, then I saw
her face clearly as we came out on the Avenue des Gobelins. The street was torn up and men were working on the
car-tracks by the light of acetylene flares. Brett's face was white and the long line of her neck showed in the bright
light of the flares. The street was dark again and I kissed her. Our lips were tight together and then she turned away
and pressed against the corner of the seat, as far away as she could get. Her head was down.
"Don't touch me," she said. "Please don't touch me."
"What's the matter?"
"I can't stand it."
"Oh, Brett."
"You mustn't. You must know. I can't stand it, that's all. Oh, darling, please understand!"
"Don't you love me?"
"Love you? I simply turn all to jelly when you touch me."
"Isn't there anything we can do about it?"
She was sitting up now. My arm was around her and she was leaning back against me, and we were quite calm.
She was looking into my eyes with that way she had of looking that made you wonder whether she really saw out of
her own eyes. They would look on and on after every one else's eyes in the world would have stopped looking. She
looked as though there were nothing on earth she would not look at like that, and really she was afraid of so many
things.
"And there's not a damn thing we could do," I said.
"I don't know," she said. "I don't want to go through that hell again."
"We'd better keep away from each other."
"But, darling, I have to see you. It isn't all that you know."
"No, but it always gets to be."
"That's my fault. Don't we pay for all the things we do, though?"
She had been looking into my eyes all the time. Her eyes had different depths, sometimes they seemed
perfectly flat. Now you could see all the way into them.
"When I think of the hell I've put chaps through. I'm paying for it all now."
"Don't talk like a fool," I said. "Besides, what happened to me is supposed to be funny. I never think about it."
"Oh, no. I'll lay you don't."
"'Well, let's shut up about it."
"I laughed about it too, myself, once." She wasn't looking at me. "A friend of my brother's came home that
way from Mons. It seemed like a hell of a joke. Chaps never know anything, do they?"
"No," I said. "Nobody ever knows anything."
I was pretty well through with the subject. At one time or another I had probably considered it from most of its
various angles, including the one that certain injuries or imperfections are a subject of merriment while remaining
quite serious for the person possessing them.
"It's funny," I said. "It's very funny. And it's a lot of fun, too, to be in love."
"Do you think so?" her eyes looked flat again.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I don't mean fun that way. In a way it's an enjoyable feeling."
"No," she said. "I think it's hell on earth."
"It's good to see each other."
"No. I don't think it is."
"Don't you want to?"
"I have to."
We were sitting now like two strangers. On the right was the Parc Montsouris. The restaurant where they have
the pool of live trout and where you can sit and look out over the park was closed and dark. The driver leaned his
head around.
"Where do you want to go?" I asked. Brett turned her head away.
"Oh, go to the Select."
"Café Select," I told the driver. "Boulevard Montparnasse." We drove straight down, turning around the Lion
de Belfort that guards the passing Montrouge trams. Brett looked straight ahead. On the Boulevard Raspail, with the
lights of Montparnasse in sight, Brett said: "Would you mind very much if I asked you to do something?"
"Don't be silly."
"Kiss me just once more before we get there."
When the taxi stopped I got out and paid. Brett came out putting on her hat. She gave me her hand as she
stepped down. Her hand was shaky. "I say, do I look too much of a mess?" She pulled her man's felt hat down and
started in for the bar. Inside, against the bar and at tables, were most of the crowd who had been at the dance.
"Hello, you chaps," Brett said. "I'm going to have a drink."
"Oh, Brett! Brett!" the little Greek portrait-painter, who called himself a duke, and whom everybody called
Zizi, pushed up to her. "I got something fine to tell you."
"Hello, Zizi," Brett said.
"I want you to meet a friend," Zizi said. A fat man came up.
"Count Mippipopolous, meet my friend Lady Ashley."
"How do you do?" said Brett.
"Well, does your Ladyship have a good time here in Paris?" asked Count Mippipopolous, who wore an elk's
tooth on his watchchain.
"Rather," said Brett.
"Paris is a fine town all right," said the count. "But I guess you have pretty big doings yourself over in
London."
"Oh, yes," said Brett. "Enormous."
Braddocks called to me from a table. "Barnes," he said, "have a drink. That girl of yours got in a frightful
row."
"What about?"
"Something the patronne's daughter said. A corking row. She was rather splendid, you know. Showed her
yellow card and demanded the patronne's daughter's too. I say it was a row."
"What finally happened?"
"Oh, some one took her home. Not a bad-looking girl. Wonderful command of the idiom. Do stay and have a
drink."
"No," I said. "I must shove off. Seen Cohn?"
"He went home with Frances," Mrs. Braddock put in.
"Poor chap, he looks awfully down," Braddocks said.
"I dare say he is," said Mrs. Braddocks.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I have to shove off," I said. "Good night."
I said good night to Brett at the bar. The count was buying champagne. "Will you take a glass of wine with us,
sir?" he asked.
"No. Thanks awfully. I have to go."
"Really going?" Brett asked.
"Yes," I said. "I've got a rotten headache."
"I'll see you to-morrow?"
"Come in at the office."
"Hardly."
"Well, where will I see you?"
"Anywhere around five o'clock."
"Make it the other side of town then."
"Good. I'll be at the Crillon at five."
"Try and be there," I said.
"Don't worry," Brett said. "I've never let you down, have I?"
"Heard from Mike?"
"Letter to-day."
"Good night, sir," said the count.
I went out onto the sidewalk and walked down toward the Boulevard St. Michel, passed the tables of the
Rotonde, still crowded, looked across the Street at the Dome, its tables running out to the edge of the pavement.
Some one waved at me from a table, I did not see who it was and went on. I wanted to get home. The Boulevard
Montparnasse was deserted. Lavigne's was closed tight, and they were stacking the tables outside the Closerie des
Lilas. I passed Ney's Statue standing among the new-leaved chestnut-trees in the arc-light. There was a faded purple
wreath leaning against the base. I stopped and read the inscription: from the Bonapartist Groups, some date; I forget.
He looked very fine, Marshal Ney in his top-boots, gesturing with his sword among the green new horse-chestnut
leaves. My flat was just across the street, a little way down the Boulevard St. Michel.
There was a light in the concierge's room and I knocked on the door and she gave me my mail. I wished her
good night and went up-stairs. There were two letters and some papers. I looked at them under the gas-light in the
dining-room. The letters were from the States. One was a bank statement. It showed a balance of $2432.60. I got out
my check-book and deducted four checks drawn since the first of the month, and discovered I had a balance of
$1832.60. I wrote this on the back of the statement. The other letter was a wedding announcement. Mr. and Mrs.
Aloysius Kirby announce the marriage of their daughter Katherine--I knew neither the girl nor the man she was
marrying. They must be circularizing the town. It was a funny name. I felt Sure I could remember anybody with a
name like Aloysius. It was a good Catholic name. There was a crest on the announcement. Like Zizi the Greek duke.
And that count. The count was funny. Brett had a title, too. Lady Ashley. To hell with Brett. To hell with you, Lady
Ashley.
I lit the lamp beside the bed, turned off the gas, and opened the wide windows. The bed was far back from the
windows, and I sat with the windows open and undressed by the bed. Outside a night train, running on the street-car
tracks, went by carrying vegetables to the markets. They were noisy at night when you could not sleep. Undressing,
I looked at myself in the mirror of the big armoire beside the bed. That was a typically French way to furnish a room.
Practical, too, I suppose. Of all the ways to be wounded. I suppose it was funny. I put on my pajamas and got into
bed. I had the two bull-fight papers, and I took their wrappers off. One was orange. The other yellow. They would
both have the same news, so whichever I read first would spoil the other. _Le Toril_ was the better paper, so I
started to read it. I read it all the way through, including the Petite Correspondance and the Cornigrams. I blew out
http://www.en8848.com.cnthe lamp. Perhaps I would be able to sleep.
My head started to work. The old grievance. Well, it was a rotten way to be wounded and flying on a joke
front like the Italian. In the Italian hospital we were going to form a society. It had a funny name in Italian. I wonder
what became of the others, the Italians. That was in the Ospedale Maggiore in Milano, Padiglione Ponte. The next
building was the Padiglione Zonda. There was a statue of Ponte, or maybe it was Zonda. That was where the liaison
colonel came to visit me. That was funny. That was about the first funny thing. I was all bandaged up. But they had
told him about it. Then he made that wonderful speech: "You, a foreigner, an Englishman" (any foreigner was an
Englishman) "have given more than your life." What a speech! I would like to have it illuminated to hang in the
office. He never laughed. He was putting himself in my place, I guess. "Che mala fortuna! Che mala fortuna!"
I never used to realize it, I guess. I try and play it along and just not make trouble for people. Probably I never
would have had any trouble if I hadn't run into Brett when they shipped me to England. I suppose she only wanted
what she couldn't have. Well, people were that way. To hell with people. The Catholic Church had an awfully good
way of handling all that. Good advice, anyway. Not to think about it. Oh, it was swell advice. Try and take it
sometime. Try and take it.
I lay awake thinking and my mind jumping around. Then I couldn't keep away from it, and I started to think
about Brett and all the rest of it went away. I was thinking about Brett and my mind stopped jumping around and
started to go in sort of smooth waves. Then all of a sudden I started to cry. Then after a while it was better and I lay
in bed and listened to the heavy trams go by and way down the street, and then I went to sleep.
I woke up. There was a row going on outside. I listened and I thought I recognized a voice. I put on a
dressing-gown and went to the door. The concierge was talking down-stairs. She was very angry. I heard my name
and called down the stairs.
"Is that you, Monsieur Barnes?" the concierge called.
"Yes. It's me."
"There's a species of woman here who's waked the whole street up. What kind of a dirty business at this time
of night! She says she must see you. I've told her you're asleep."
Then I heard Brett's voice. Half asleep I had been sure it was Georgette. I don't know why. She could not have
known my address.
"Will you send her up, please?"
Brett came up the stairs. I saw she was quite drunk. "Silly thing to do," she said. "Make an awful row. I say,
you weren't asleep, were you?"
"What did you think I was doing?"
"Don't know. What time is it?"
I looked at the clock. It was half-past four. "Had no idea what hour it was," Brett said. "I say, can a chap sit
down? Don't be cross, darling. Just left the count. He brought me here."
"What's he like?" I was getting brandy and soda and glasses.
"Just a little," said Brett. "Don't try and make me drunk. The count? Oh, rather. He's quite one of us."
"Is he a count?"
"Here's how. I rather think so, you know. Deserves to be, anyhow. Knows hell's own amount about people.
Don't know where he got it all. Owns a chain of sweetshops in the States."
She sipped at her glass.
"Think he called it a chain. Something like that. Linked them all up. Told me a little about it. Damned
interesting. He's one of us, though. Oh, quite. No doubt. One can always tell."
She took another drink.
"How do I buck on about all this? You don't mind, do you? He's putting up for Zizi, you know."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Is Zizi really a duke, too?"
"I shouldn't wonder. Greek, you know. Rotten painter. I rather liked the count."
"Where did you go with him?"
"Oh, everywhere. He just brought me here now. Offered me ten thousand dollars to go to Biarritz with him.
How much is that in pounds?"
"Around two thousand."
"Lot of money. I told him I couldn't do it. He was awfully nice about it. Told him I knew too many people in
Biarritz."
Brett laughed.
"I say, you are slow on the up-take," she said. I had only sipped my brandy and soda. I took a long drink.
"That's better. Very funny," Brett said. "Then he wanted me to go to Cannes with him. Told him I knew too
many people in Cannes. Monte Carlo. Told him I knew too many people in Monte Carlo. Told him I knew too many
people everywhere. Quite true, too. So I asked him to bring me here."
She looked at me, her hand on the table, her glass raised. "Don't look like that," she said. "Told him I was in
love with you. True, too. Don't look like that. He was damn nice about it. Wants to drive us out to dinner to-morrow
night. Like to go?"
"Why not?"
"I'd better go now."
"Why?"
"Just wanted to see you. Damned silly idea. Want to get dressed and come down? He's got the car just up the
Street."
"The count?"
"Himself. And a chauffeur in livery. Going to drive me around and have breakfast in the Bois. Hampers. Got it
all at Zelli's. Dozen bottles of Mumms. Tempt you?"
"I have to work in the morning," I said. "I'm too far behind you now to catch up and be any fun."
"Don't be an ass."
"Can't do it."
"Right. Send him a tender message?"
"Anything. Absolutely."
"Good night, darling."
"Don't be sentimental."
"You make me ill."
We kissed good night and Brett shivered. "I'd better go," she said. "Good night, darling."
"You don't have to go."
"Yes."
We kissed again on the stairs and as I called for the cordon the concierge muttered something behind her door.
I went back upstairs and from the open window watched Brett walking up the street to the big limousine drawn up
to the curb under the arc-light. She got in and it started off. I turned around. On the table was an empty glass and a
glass half-full of brandy and soda. I took them both out to the kitchen and poured the half-full glass down the sink. I
turned off the gas in the dining-room, kicked off my slippers sitting on the bed, and got into bed. This was Brett, that
I had felt like crying about. Then I thought of her walking up the street and stepping into the car, as I had last seen
her, and of course in a little while I felt like hell again. It is awfully easy to be hard-boiled about everything in the
daytime, but at night it is another thing.
http://www.en8848.com.cn5
In the morning I walked down the Boulevard to the Rue Soufflot for coffee and brioche. It was a fine morning.
The horse-chestnut trees in the Luxembourg gardens were in bloom. There was the pleasant early-morning feeling
of a hot day. I read the papers with the coffee and then smoked a cigarette. The flower-women were coming up from
the market and arranging their daily stock. Students went by going up to the law school, or down to the Sorbonne.
The Boulevard was busy with trams and people going to work. I got on an S bus and rode down to the Madeleine,
standing on the back platform. From the Madeleine I walked along the Boulevard des Capucines to the Opéra, and
up to my office. I passed the man with the jumping frogs and the man with the boxer toys. I stepped aside to avoid
walking into the thread with which his girl assistant manipulated the boxers. She was standing looking away, the
thread in her folded hands. The man was urging two tourists to buy. Three more tourists had stopped and were
watching. I walked on behind a man who was pushing a roller that printed the name CINZANO on the sidewalk in
damp letters. All along people were going to work. It felt pleasant to be going to work. I walked across the avenue
and turned in to my office.
Up-stairs in the office I read the French morning papers, smoked, and then sat at the typewriter and got off a
good morning's work. At eleven o'clock I went over to the Quai d'Orsay in a taxi and went in and sat with about a
dozen correspondents, while the foreign-office mouthpiece, a young Nouvelle Revue Francaise diplomat in
hornrimmed spectacles, talked and answered questions for half an hour. The President of the Council was in Lyons
making a speech, or, rather he was on his way back. Several people asked questions to hear themselves talk and
there were a couple of questions asked by news service men who wanted to know the answers. There was no news. I
shared a taxi back from the Quai d'Orsay with Woolsey and Krum.
"What do you do nights, Jake?" asked Krum. "I never see you around."
"Oh, I'm over in the Quarter."
"I'm coming over some night. The Dingo. That's the great place, isn't it?"
"Yes. That, or this new dive, the Select."
"I've meant to get over," said Krum. "You know how it is, though, with a wife and kids."
"Playing any tennis?" Woolsey asked.
"Well, no," said Krum. "I can't say I've played any this year. I've tried to get away, but Sundays it's always
rained, and the courts are so damned crowded."
"The Englishmen all have Saturday off," Woolsey said.
"Lucky beggars," said Krum. "Well, I'll tell you. Some day I'm not going to be working for an agency. Then
I'll have plenty of time to get out in the country."
"That's the thing to do. Live out in the country and have a little car."
"I've been thinking some about getting a car next year."
I banged on the glass. The chauffeur stopped. "Here's my street," I said. "Come in and have a drink."
"Thanks, old man," Krum said. Woolsey shook his head. "I've got to file that line he got off this morning."
I put a two-franc piece in Krum's hand.
"You're crazy, Jake," he said. "This is on me."
"It's all on the office, anyway."
"Nope. I want to get it."
I waved good-by. Krum put his head out. "See you at the lunch on Wednesday."
"You bet."
I went to the office in the elevator. Robert Cohn was waiting for me. "Hello, Jake," he said. "Going out to
lunch?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Yes. Let me see if there is anything new."
"Where will we eat?"
"Anywhere."
I was looking over my desk. "Where do you want to eat?"
"How about Wetzel's? They've got good hors d'oeuvres."
In the restaurant we ordered hors d'oeuvres and beer. The sommelier brought the beer, tall, beaded on the
outside of the stems, and cold. There were a dozen different dishes of hors d'oeuvres.
"Have any fun last night?" I asked.
"No. I don't think so."
"How's the writing going?"
"Rotten. I can't get this second book going."
"That happens to everybody."
"Oh, I'm sure of that. It gets me worried, though."
"Thought any more about going to South America?"
"I mean that."
"Well, why don't you start off?"
"Frances."
"Well," I said, "take her with you."
"She wouldn't like it. That isn't the sort of thing she likes. She likes a lot of people around."
"Tell her to go to hell."
"I can't. I've got certain obligations to her."
He shoved the sliced cucumbers away and took a pickled herring.
"What do you know about Lady Brett Ashley, Jake?"
"Her name's Lady Ashley. Brett's her own name. She's a nice girl," I said. "She's getting a divorce and she's
going to marry Mike Campbell. He's over in Scotland now. Why?"
"She's a remarkably attractive woman."
"Isn't she?"
"There's a certain quality about her, a certain fineness. She seems to be absolutely fine and straight."
"She's very nice."
"I don't know how to describe the quality," Cohn said. "I suppose it's breeding."
"You sound as though you liked her pretty well."
"I do. I shouldn't wonder if I were in love with her."
"She's a drunk," I said. "She's in love with Mike Campbell, and she's going to marry him. He's going to be rich
as hell some day."
"I don't believe she'll ever marry him."
"Why not?"
"I don't know. I just don't believe it. Have you known her a long time?"
"Yes," I said. "She was a V. A. D. in a hospital I was in during the war."
"She must have been just a kid then."
"She's thirty-four now."
"When did she marry Ashley?"
"During the war. Her own true love had just kicked off with the dysentery."
"You talk sort of bitter."
"Sorry. I didn't mean to. I was just trying to give you the facts."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I don't believe she would marry anybody she didn't love."
"Well," I said. "She's done it twice."
"I don't believe it."
"Well," I said, "don't ask me a lot of fool questions if you don't like the answers."
"I didn't ask you that."
"You asked me what I knew about Brett Ashley."
"I didn't ask you to insult her."
"Oh, go to hell."
He stood up from the table his face white, and stood there white and angry behind the little plates of hors
d'ceuvres.
"Sit down," I said. "Don't be a fool."
"You've got to take that back."
"Oh, cut out the prep-school stuff."
"Take it back."
"Sure. Anything. I never heard of Brett Ashley. How's that?"
"No. Not that. About me going to hell."
"Oh, don't go to hell," I said. "Stick around. We're just starting lunch."
Cohn smiled again and sat down. He seemed glad to sit down. What the hell would he have done if he hadn't
sat down? "You say such damned insulting things, Jake."
"I'm sorry. I've got a nasty tongue. I never mean it when I say nasty things."
"I know it," Cohn said. "You're really about the best friend I have, Jake."
God help you, I thought. "Forget what I said," I said out loud. "I'm sorry."
"It's all right. It's fine. I was just sore for a minute."
"Good. Let's get something else to eat."
After we finished the lunch we walked up to the Café de la Paix and had coffee. I could feel Cohn wanted to
bring up Brett again, but I held him off it. We talked about one thing and another, and I left him to come to the
office.
http://www.en8848.com.cn6
At five o'clock I was in the Hotel Crillon waiting for Brett. She was not there, so I sat down and wrote some
letters. They were not very good letters but I hoped their being on Crillon stationery would help them. Brett did not
turn up, so about quarter to six I went down to the bar and had a Jack Rose with George the barman. Brett had not
been in the bar either, and so I looked for her up-stairs on my way out, and took a taxi to the Café Select. Crossing
the Seine I saw a string of barges being towed empty down the current, riding high, the bargemen at the sweeps as
they came toward the bridge. The river looked nice. It was always pleasant crossing bridges in Paris.
The taxi rounded the statue of the inventor of the semaphore engaged in doing same, and turned up the
Boulevard Raspail, and I sat back to let that part of the ride pass. The Boulevard Raspail always made dull riding. It
was like a certain stretch on the P.L.M. between Fontainebleau and Montereau that always made me feel bored and
dead and dull until it was over. I suppose it is some association of ideas that makes those dead places in a journey.
There are other streets in Paris as ugly as the Boulevard Raspail. It is a street I do not mind walking down at all. But
I cannot stand to ride along it. Perhaps I had read something about it once. That was the way Robert Cohn was about
all of Paris. I wondered where Cohn got that incapacity to enjoy Paris. Possibly from Mencken. Mencken hates
Paris, I believe. So many young men get their likes and dislikes from Mencken.
The taxi stopped in front of the Rotonde. No matter what café in Montparnasse you ask a taxi-driver to bring
you to from the right bank of the river, they always take you to the Rotonde. Ten years from now it will probably be
the Dome. It was near enough, anyway. I walked past the sad tables of the Rotonde to the Select. There were a few
people inside at the bar, and outside, alone, sat Harvey Stone. He had a pile of saucers in front of him, and he
needed a shave.
"Sit down," said Harvey, "I've been looking for you."
"What's the matter?"
"Nothing. Just looking for you."
"Been out to the races?"
"No. Not since Sunday."
"What do you hear from the States?"
"Nothing. Absolutely nothing."
"What's the matter?"
"I don't know. I'm through with them. I'm absolutely through with them."
He leaned forward and looked me in the eye.
"Do you want to know something, Jake?"
"Yes."
"I haven't had anything to eat for five days."
I figured rapidly back in my mind. It was three days ago that Harvey had won two hundred francs from me
shaking poker dice in the New York Bar.
"What's the matter?"
"No money. Money hasn't come," he paused. "I tell you it's strange, Jake. When I'm like this I just want to be
alone. I want to stay in my own room. I'm like a cat."
I felt in my pocket.
"Would a hundred help you any, Harvey?"
"Yes."
"Come on. Let's go and eat."
"There's no hurry. Have a drink."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Better eat."
"No. When I get like this I don't care whether I eat or not."
We had a drink. Harvey added my saucer to his own pile.
"Do you know Mencken, Harvey?"
"Yes. Why?"
"What's he like?"
"He's all right. He says some pretty funny things. Last time I had dinner with him we talked about
Hoffenheimer. 'The trouble is,' he said, 'he's a garter snapper.' That's not bad."
"That's not bad."
"He's through now," Harvey went on. "He's written about all the things he knows, and now he's on all the
things he doesn't know."
"I guess he's all right," I said. "I just can't read him."
"Oh, nobody reads him now," Harvey said, "except the people that used to read the Alexander Hamilton
Institute."
"Well," I said. "That was a good thing, too."
"Sure," said Harvey. So we sat and thought deeply for a while.
"Have another port?"
"All right," said Harvey.
"There comes Cohn," I said. Robert Cohn was crossing the street.
"That moron," said Harvey. Cohn came up to our table.
"Hello, you bums," he said.
"Hello, Robert," Harvey said. "I was just telling Jake here that you're a moron."
"What do you mean?"
"Tell us right off. Don't think. What would you rather do if you could do anything you wanted?"
Cohn started to consider.
"Don't think. Bring it right out."
"I don't know," Cohn said. "What's it all about, anyway?"
"I mean what would you rather do. What comes into your head first. No matter how silly it is."
"I don't know," Cohn said. "I think I'd rather play football again with what I know about handling myself,
now."
"I misjudged you," Harvey said. "You're not a moron. You're only a case of arrested development."
"You're awfully funny, Harvey," Cohn said. "Some day somebody will push your face in."
Harvey Stone laughed. "You think so. They won't, though. Because it wouldn't make any difference to me. I'm
not a fighter."
"It would make a difference to you if anybody did it."
"No, it wouldn't. That's where you make your big mistake. Because you're not intelligent."
"Cut it out about me."
"Sure," said Harvey. "It doesn't make any difference to me. You don't mean anything to me."
"Come on, Harvey," I said. "Have another porto."
"No," he said. "I'm going up the street and eat. See you later, Jake."
He walked out and up the street. I watched him crossing the street through the taxis, small, heavy, slowly sure
of himself in the traffic.
"He always gets me sore," Cohn said. "I can't stand him."
"I like him," I said. "I'm fond of him. You don't want to get sore at him."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I know it," Cohn said. "He just gets on my nerves."
"Write this afternoon?"
"No. I couldn't get it going. It's harder to do than my first book. I'm having a hard time handling it."
The sort of healthy conceit that he had when he returned from America early in the spring was gone. Then he
had been sure of his work, only with these personal longings for adventure. Now the sureness was gone. Somehow I
feel I have not shown Robert Cohn clearly. The reason is that until he fell in love with Brett, I never heard him make
one remark that would, in any way, detach him from other people. He was nice to watch on the tennis-court, he had
a good body, and he kept it in shape; he handled his cards well at bridge, and he had a funny sort of undergraduate
quality about him. If he were in a crowd nothing he said stood out. He wore what used to be called polo shirts at
school, and may be called that still, but he was not professionally youthful. I do not believe he thought about his
clothes much. Externally he had been formed at Prii1ceton. Internally he had been moulded by the two women who
had trained him. He had a nice, boyish sort of cheerfulness that had never been trained out of him, and I probably
have not brought it out. He loved to win at tennis. He probably loved to win as much as Lenglen, for instance. On
the other hand, he was not angry at being beaten. When he fell in love with Brett his tennis game went all to pieces.
People beat him who had never had a chance with him. He was very nice about it.
Anyhow, we were sitting on the terrace of the Café Select, and Harvey Stone had just crossed the street.
"Come on up to the Lilas," I said.
"I have a date."
"What time?"
"Frances is coming here at seven-fifteen."
"There she is."
Frances Clyne was coming toward us from across the street. She was a very tall girl who walked with a great
deal of movement. She waved and smiled. We watched her cross the street.
"Hello," she said, "I'm so glad you're here, Jake. I've been wanting to talk to you."
"Hello, Frances," said Cohn. He smiled.
"Why, hello, Robert. Are you here?" She went on, talking rapidly. "I've had the darndest time. This
one"--shaking her head at Cohn--"didn't come home for lunch."
"I wasn't supposed to."
"Oh, I know. But you didn't say anything about it to the cook. Then I had a date myself, and Paula wasn't at
her office. I went to the Ritz and waited for her, and she never came, and of course I didn't have enough money to
lunch at the Ritz--"
"What did you do?"
"Oh, went out, of course." She spoke in a sort of imitation joyful manner. "I always keep my appointments. No
one keeps theirs, nowadays. I ought to know better. How are you, Jake, anyway?"
"Fine."
"That was a fine girl you had at the dance, and then went off with that Brett one."
"Don't you like her?" Cohn asked.
"I think she's perfectly charming. Don't you?"
Cohn said nothing.
"Look, Jake. I want to talk with you. Would you come over with me to the Dome? You'll stay here, won't you,
Robert? Come on, Jake."
We crossed the Boulevard Montparnasse and sat down at a table. A boy came up with the _Paris Times_, and I
bought one and opened it.
"What's the matter, Frances?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Oh, nothing," she said, "except that he wants to leave me."
"How do you mean?"
"Oh, he told every one that we were going to be married, and I told my mother and every one, and now he
doesn't want to do it."
"What's the matter?"
"He's decided he hasn't lived enough. I knew it would happen when he went to New York."
She looked up, very bright-eyed and trying to talk inconsequentially.
"I wouldn't marry him if he doesn't want to. Of course I wouldn't. I wouldn't marry him now for anything. But
it does seem to me to be a little late now, after we've waited three years, and I've just gotten my divorce."
I said nothing.
"We were going to celebrate so, and instead we've just had scenes. It's so childish. We have dreadful scenes,
and he cries and begs me to be reasonable, but he says he just can't do it."
"It's rotten luck."
"I should say it is rotten luck. I've wasted two years and a half on him now. And I don't know now if any man
will ever want to marry me. Two years ago I could have married anybody I wanted, down at Cannes. All the old
ones that wanted to marry somebody chic and settle down were crazy about me. Now I don't think I could get
anybody."
"Sure, you could marry anybody."
"No, I don't believe it. And I'm fond of him, too. And I'd like to have children. I always thought we'd have
children."
She looked at me very brightly. "I never liked children much, but I don't want to think I'll never have them. I
always thought I'd have them and then like them."
"He's got children."
"Oh, yes. He's got children, and he's got money, and he's got a rich mother, and he's written a book, and
nobody will publish my stuff, nobody at all. It isn't bad, either. And I haven't got any money at all. I could have had
alimony, but I got the divorce the quickest way."
She looked at me again very brightly.
"It isn't right. It's my own fault and it's not, too. I ought to have known better. And when I tell him he just cries
and says he can't marry. Why can't he marry? I'd be a good wife. I'm easy to get along with. I leave him alone. It
doesn't do any good."
"It's a rotten shame."
"Yes, it is a rotten shame. But there's no use talking about it, is there? Come on, let's go back to the café."
"And of course there isn't anything I can do."
"No. Just don't let him know I talked to you. I know what he wants." Now for the first time she dropped her
bright, terribly cheerful manner. "He wants to go back to New York alone, and be there when his book comes out so
when a lot of little chickens like it. That's what he wants."
"Maybe they won't like it. I don't think he's that way. Really."
"You don't know him like I do, Jake. That's what he wants to do. I know it. I know it. That's why he doesn't
want to marry. He wants to have a big triumph this fall all by himself."
"Want to go back to the café?"
"Yes. Come on."
We got up from the table--they had never brought us a drink-- and started across the street toward the Select,
where Cohn sat smiling at us from behind the marble-topped table.
"Well, what are you smiling at?" Frances asked him. "Feel pretty happy?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I was smiling at you and Jake with your secrets."
"Oh, what I've told Jake isn't any secret. Everybody will know it soon enough. I only wanted to give Jake a
decent version."
"What was it? About your going to England?"
"Yes, about my going to England. Oh, Jake! I forgot to tell you. I'm going to England."
"Isn't that fine!"
"Yes, that's the way it's done in the very best families. Robert's sending me. He's going to give me two
hundred pounds and then I'm going to visit friends. Won't it be lovely? The friends don't know about it, yet."
She turned to Cohn and smiled at him. He was not smiling now.
"You were only going to give me a hundred pounds, weren't you, Robert? But I made him give me two
hundred. He's really very generous. Aren't you, Robert?"
I do not know how people could say such terrible things to Robert Cohn. There are people to whom you could
not say insulting things. They give you a feeling that the world would be destroyed, would actually be destroyed
before your eyes, if you said certain things. But here was Cohn taking it all. Here it was, all going on right before
me, and I did not even feel an impulse to try and stop it. And this was friendly joking to what went on later.
"How can you say such things, Frances?" Cohn interrupted.
"Listen to him. I'm going to England. I'm going to visit friends. Ever visit friends that didn't want you? Oh,
they'll have to take me, all right. 'How do you do, my dear? Such a long time since we've seen you. And how is your
dear mother?' Yes, how is my dear mother? She put all her money into French war bonds. Yes, she did. Probably the
only person in the world that did. 'And what about Robert?' or else very careful talking around Robert. 'You must be
most careful not to mention him, my dear. Poor Frances has had a most unfortunate experience.' Won't it be fun,
Robert? Don't you think it will be fun, Jake?"
She turned to me with that terribly bright smile. It was very satisfactory to her to have an audience for this.
"And where are you going to be, Robert? It's my own fault, all right. Perfectly my own fault. When I made
you get rid of your little secretary on the magazine I ought to have known you'd get rid of me the same way. Jake
doesn't know about that. Should I tell him?"
"Shut up, Frances, for God's sake."
"Yes, I'll tell him. Robert had a little secretary on the magazine. Just the sweetest little thing in the world, and
he thought she was wonderful, and then I came along and he thought I was pretty wonderful, too. So I made him get
rid of her, and he had brought her to Provincetown from Carmel when he moved the magazine, and he didn't even
pay her fare back to the coast. All to please me. He thought I was pretty fine, then. Didn't you, Robert?
"You mustn't misunderstand, Jake, it was absolutely platonic with the secretary. Not even platonic. Nothing at
all, really. It was just that she was so nice. And he did that just to please me. Well, I suppose that we that live by the
sword shall perish by the sword. Isn't that literary, though? You want to remember that for your next book, Robert.
"You know Robert is going to get material for a new book. Aren't you, Robert? That's why he's leaving me.
He's decided I don't film well. You see, he was so busy all the time that we were living together, writing on this
book, that he doesn't remember anything about us. So now he's going out and get some new material. Well, I hope
he gets something frightfully interesting.
"Listen, Robert, dear. Let me tell you something. You won't mind, will you? Don't have scenes with your
young ladies. Try not to. Because you can't have scenes without crying, and then you pity yourself so much you
can't remember what the other person's said. You'll never be able to remember any conversations that way. Just try
and be calm. I know it's awfully hard. But remember, it's for literature. We all ought to make sacrifices for literature.
Look at me. I'm going to England without a protest. All for literature. We must all help young writers. Don't you
think so, Jake? But you're not a young writer. Are you, Robert? You're thirty-four. Still, I suppose that is young for a
http://www.en8848.com.cngreat writer. Look at Hardy. Look at Anatole France. He just died a little while ago. Robert doesn't think he's any
good, though. Some of his French friends told him. He doesn't read French very well himself. He wasn't a good
writer like you are, was he, Robert? Do you think he ever had to go and look for material? What do you suppose he
said to his mistresses when he wouldn't marry them? I wonder if he cried, too? Oh, I've just thought of something."
She put her gloved hand up to her lips. "I know the real reason why Robert won't marry me, Jake. It's just come to
me. They've sent it to me in a vision in the Café Select. Isn't it mystic? Some day they'll put a tablet up. Like at
Lourdes. Do you want to hear, Robert? I'll tell you. It's so simple. I wonder why I never thought about it. Why, you
see, Robert's always wanted to have a mistress, and if he doesn't marry me, why, then he's had one. She was his
mistress for over two years. See how it is? And if he marries me, like he's always promised he would, that would be
the end of all the romance. Don't you think that's bright of me to figure that out? It's true, too. Look at him and see if
it's not. Where are you going, Jake?"
"I've got to go in and see Harvey Stone a minute."
Cohn looked up as I went in. His face was white. Why did he sit there? Why did he keep on taking it like that?
As I stood against the bar looking out I could see them through the window. Frances was talking on to him,
smiling brightly, looking into his face each time she asked: "Isn't it so, Robert?" Or maybe she did not ask that now.
Perhaps she said something else. I told the barman I did not want anything to drink and went out through the side
door. As I went out the door I looked back through the two thicknesses of glass and saw them sitting there. She was
still talking to him. I went down a side street to the Boulevard Raspail. A taxi came along and I got in and gave the
driver the address of my flat.
http://www.en8848.com.cn7
As I started up the stairs the concierge knocked on the glass of the door of her lodge, and as I stopped she
came out. She had some letters and a telegram.
"Here is the post. And there was a lady here to see you."
"Did she leave a card?"
"No. She was with a gentleman. It was the one who was here last night. In the end I find she is very nice."
"Was she with a friend of mine?"
"I don't know. He was never here before. He was very large. Very, very large. She was very nice. Very, very
nice. Last night she was, perhaps, a little--" She put her head on one hand and rocked it up and down. "I'll speak
perfectly frankly, Monsieur Barnes. Last night I found her not so gentille. Last night I formed another idea of her.
But listen to what I tell you. She is très, très gentille. She is of very good family. It is a thing you can see."
"They did not leave any word?"
"Yes. They said they would be back in an hour."
"Send them up when they come."
"Yes, Monsieur Barnes. And that lady, that lady there is some one. An eccentric, perhaps, but quelqu'une,
quelqu'une!"
The concierge, before she became a concierge, had owned a drink-selling concession at the Paris race-courses.
Her life-work lay in the pelouse, but she kept an eye on the people of the pesage, and she took great pride in telling
me which of my guests were well brought up, which were of good family, who were sportsmen, a French word
pronounced with the accent on the men. The only trouble was that people who did not fall into any of those three
categories were very liable to be told there was no one home, chez Barnes. One of my friends, an extremely
underfed-looking painter, who was obviously to Madame Duzinell neither well brought up, of good family, nor a
sportsman, wrote me a letter asking if I could get him a pass to get by the concierge so he could come up and see me
occasionally in the evenings.
I went up to the flat wondering what Brett had done to the concierge. The wire was a cable from Bill Gorton,
saying he was arriving on the _France_. I put the mail on the table, went back to the bedroom, undressed and had a
shower. I was rubbing down when I heard the door-bell pull. I put on a bathrobe and slippers and went to the door. It
was Brett. Back of her was the count. He was holding a great bunch of roses.
"Hello, darling," said Brett. "Aren't you going to let us in?"
"Come on. I was just bathing."
"Aren't you the fortunate man. Bathing."
"Only a shower. Sit down, Count Mippipopolous. What will you drink?"
"I don't know whether you like flowers, sir," the count said, "but I took the liberty of just bringing these
roses."
"Here, give them to me." Brett took them. "Get me some water in this, Jake." I filled the big earthenware jug
with water in the kitchen, and Brett put the roses in it, and placed them in the centre of the dining-room table.
"I say. We have had a day."
"You don't remember anything about a date with me at the Crillon?"
"No. Did we have one? I must have been blind."
"You were quite drunk, my dear," said the count.
"Wasn't I, though? And the count's been a brick, absolutely."
"You've got hell's own drag with the concierge now."
"I ought to have. Gave her two hundred francs."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Don't be a damned fool."
"His," she said, and nodded at the count.
"I thought we ought to give her a little something for last night. It was very late."
"He's wonderful," Brett said. "He remembers everything that's happened."
"So do you, my dear."
"Fancy," said Brett. "Who'd want to? I say, Jake, do we get a drink?"
"You get it while I go in and dress. You know where it is."
"Rather."
While I dressed I heard Brett put down glasses and then a siphon, and then heard them talking. I dressed
slowly, sitting on the bed. I felt tired and pretty rotten. Brett came in the room, a glass in her hand, and sat on the
bed.
"What's the matter, darling? Do you feel rocky?"
She kissed me coolly on the forehead.
"Oh, Brett, I love you so much."
"Darling," she said. Then: "Do you want me to send him away?"
"No. He's nice."
"I'll send him away."
"No, don't."
"Yes, I'll send him away."
"You can't just like that."
"Can't I, though? You stay here. He's mad about me, I tell you."
She was gone out of the room. I lay face down on the bed. I was having a bad time. I heard them talking but I
did not listen. Brett came in and sat on the bed.
"Poor old darling." She stroked my head.
"What did you say to him?" I was lying with my face away from her. I did not want to see her.
"Sent him for champagne. He loves to go for champagne."
Then later: "Do you feel better, darling? Is the head any better?"
"It's better."
"Lie quiet. He's gone to the other side of town."
"Couldn't we live together, Brett? Couldn't we just live together?"
"I don't think so. I'd just _tromper_ you with everybody. You couldn't stand it."
"I stand it now."
"That would be different. It's my fault, Jake. It's the way I'm made."
"Couldn't we go off in the country for a while?"
"It wouldn't be any good. I'll go if you like. But I couldn't live quietly in the country. Not with my own true
love."
"I know."
"Isn't it rotten? There isn't any use my telling you I love you."
"You know I love you."
"Let's not talk. Talking's all bilge. I'm going away from you, and then Michael's coming back."
"Why are you going away?"
"Better for you. Better for me."
"When are you going?"
"Soon as I can."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Where?"
"San Sebastian."
"Can't we go together?"
"No. That would be a hell of an idea after we'd just talked it out."
"We never agreed."
"Oh, you know as well as I do. Don't he obstinate, darling."
"Oh, sure," I said. "I knowyou're right. I'm just low, and when I'm low I talk like a fool."
I sat up, leaned over, found my shoes beside the bed and put them on. I stood up.
"Don't look like that, darling."
"How do you want me to look?"
"Oh, don't be a fool. I'm going away to-morrow."
"To-morrow?"
"Yes. Didn't I say so? I am."
"Let's have a drink, then. The count will be back."
"Yes. He should be back. You know he's extraordinary about buying champagne. It means any amount to
him."
We went into the dining-room. I took up the brandy bottle and poured Brett a drink and one for myself. There
was a ring at the bell-pull. I went to the door and there was the count. Behind him was the chauffeur carrying a
basket of champagne.
"Where should I have him put it, sir?" asked the count.
"In the kitchen," Brett said.
"Put it in there, Henry," the count motioned. "Now go down and get the ice." He stood looking after the basket
inside the kitchen door. "I think you'll find that's very good wine," he said. "I know we don't get much of a chance to
judge good wine in the States now, but I got this from a friend of mine that's in the business."
"Oh, you always have some one in the trade," Brett said.
"This fellow raises the grapes. He's got thousands of acres of them."
"What's his name?" asked Brett. "Veuve Cliquot?"
"No," said the count. "Mumms. He's a baron."
"Isn't it wonderful," said Brett. "We all have titles. Why haven't you a title, Jake?"
"I assure you, sir," the count put his hand on my arm. "It never does a man any good. Most of the time it costs
you money."
"Oh, I don't know. It's damned useful sometimes," Brett said.
"I've never known it to do me any good."
"You haven't used it properly. I've had hell's own amount of credit on mine."
"Do sit down, count," I said. "Let me take that stick."
The count was looking at Brett across the table under the gaslight. She was smoking a cigarette and flicking
the ashes on the rug. She saw me notice it. "I say, Jake, I don't want to ruin your rugs. Can't you give a chap an
ash-tray?"
I found some ash-trays and spread them around. The chauffeur came up with a bucket full of salted ice. "Put
two bottles in it, Henry," the count called.
"Anything else, sir?"
"No. Wait down in the car." He turned to Brett and to me. "We'll want to ride out to the Bois for dinner?"
"If you like," Brett said. "I couldn't eat a thing."
"I always like a good meal," said the count.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Should I bring the wine in, sir?" asked the chauffeur.
"Yes. Bring it in, Henry," said the count. He took out a heavy pigskin cigar-case and offered it to me. "Like to
try a real American cigar?"
"Thanks," I said. "I'll finish the cigarette."
He cut off the end of his cigar with a gold cutter he wore on one end of his watch-chain.
"I like a cigar to really draw," said the count. "Half the cigars you smoke don't draw."
He lit the cigar, puffed at it, looking across the table at Brett. "And when you're divorced, Lady Ashley, then
you won't have a title."
"No. What a pity."
"No," said the count. "You don't need a title. You got class all over you."
"Thanks. Awfully decent of you."
"I'm not joking you," the count blew a cloud of smoke. "You got the most class of anybody I ever seen. You
got it. That's all."
"Nice of you," said Brett. "Mummy would be pleased. Couldn't you write it out, and I'll send it in a letter to
her."
"I'd tell her, too," said the count. "I'm not joking you. I never joke people. Joke people and you make enemies.
That's what I always say."
"You're right," Brett said. "You're terribly right. I always joke people and I haven't a friend in the world.
Except Jake here."
"You don't joke him."
"That's it."
"Do you, now?" asked the count. "Do you joke him?"
Brett looked at me and wrinkled up the corners of her eyes.
"No," she said. "I wouldn't joke him."
"See," said the count. "You don't joke him."
"This is a hell of a dull talk," Brett said. "How about some of that champagne?"
The count reached down and twirled the bottles in the shiny bucket. "It isn't cold, yet. You're always drinking,
my dear. Why don't you just talk?"
"I've talked too ruddy much. I've talked myself all out to Jake."
"I should like to hear you really talk, my dear. When you talk to me you never finish your sentences at all."
"Leave 'em for you to finish. Let any one finish them as they like."
"It is a very interesting system," the count reached down and gave the bottles a twirl. "Still I would like to hear
you talk some time."
"Isn't he a fool?" Brett asked.
"Now," the count brought up a bottle. "I think this is cool."
I brought a towel and he wiped the bottle dry and held it up. "I like to drink champagne from magnums. The
wine is better but it would have been too hard to cool." He held the bottle, looking at it. I put out the glasses.
"I say. You might open it," Brett suggested.
"Yes, my dear. Now I'll open it."
It was amazing champagne.
"I say that is wine," Brett held up her glass. "We ought to toast something. 'Here's to royalty.'
"This wine is too good for toast-drinking, my dear. You don't want to mix emotions up with a wine like that.
You lose the taste."
Brett's glass was empty.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"You ought to write a book on wines, count," I said.
"Mr. Barnes," answered the count, "all I want out of wines is to enjoy them."
"Let's enjoy a little more of this," Brett pushed her glass forward. The count poured very carefully. "There, my
dear. Now you enjoy that slowly, and then you can get drunk."
"Drunk? Drunk?"
"My dear, you are charming when you are drunk."
"Listen to the man."
"Mr. Barnes," the count poured my glass full. "She is the only lady I have ever known who was as charming
when she was drunk as when she was sober."
"You haven't been around much, have you?"
"Yes, my dear. I have been around very much. I have been around a very great deal."
"Drink your wine," said Brett. "We've all been around. I dare say Jake here has seen as much as you have."
My dear, I am sure Mr. Barnes has seen a lot. Don t think I don't think so, sir. I have seen a lot, too."
"Of course you have, my dear," Brett said. "I was only ragging."
"I have been in seven wars and four revolutions," the count said.
"Soldiering?" Brett asked.
"Sometimes, my dear. And I have got arrow wounds. Have you ever seen arrow wounds?"
"Let's have a look at them."
The count stood up, unbuttoned his vest, and opened his shirt. He pulled up the undershirt onto his chest and
stood, his chest black, and big stomach muscles bulging under the light.
"You see them?"
Below the line where his ribs stopped were two raised white welts. "See on the back where they come out."
Above the small of the back were the same two scars, raised as thick as a finger.
"I say. Those are something."
"Clean through."
The count was tucking in his shirt.
"Where did you get those?" I asked.
"In Abyssinia. When I was twenty-one years old."
"What were you doing?" asked Brett. "Were you in the army?"
"I was on a business trip, my dear."
"I told you he was one of us. Didn't I?" Brett turned to me. "I love you, count. You're a darling."
"You make me very happy, my dear. But it isn't true."
"Don't be an ass."
"You see, Mr. Barnes, it is because I have lived very much that now I can enjoy everything so well. Don't you
find it like that?"
"Yes. Absolutely."
"I know," said the count. "That is the secret. You must get to know the values."
"Doesn't anything ever happen to your values?" Brett asked.
"No. Not any more."
"Never fall in love?"
"Always," said the count. "I am always in love."
"What does that do to your values?"
"That, too, has got a place in my values."
"You haven't any values. You're dead, that's all."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"No, my dear. You're not right. I'm not dead at all."
We drank three bottles of the champagne and the count left the basket in my kitchen. We dined at a restaurant
in the Bois. It was a good dinner. Food had an excellent place in the count's values. So did wine. The count was in
fine form during the meal. So was Brett. It was a good party.
"Where would you like to go?" asked the count after dinner. We were the only people left in the restaurant.
The two waiters were standing over against the door. They wanted to go home.
"We might go up on the hill," Brett said. "Haven't we had a splendid party?"
The count was beaming. He was very happy.
"You are very nice people," he said. He was smoking a cigar again. "Why don't you get married, you two?"
"We want to lead our own lives," I said.
"We have our careers," Brett said. "Come on. Let's get out of this."
"Have another brandy," the count said.
"Get it on the hill."
"No. Have it here where it is quiet."
"You and your quiet," said Brett. "What is it men feel about quiet?"
"We like it," said the count. "Like you like noise, my dear."
"All right," said Brett. "Let's have one."
"Sommelier!" the count called.
"Yes, sir."
"What is the oldest brandy you have?"
"Eighteen eleven, sir."
"Bring us a bottle."
"I say. Don't be ostentatious. Call him off, Jake."
"Listen, my dear. I get more value for my money in old brandy than in any other antiquities."
"Got many antiquities?"
"I got a houseful."
Finally we went up to Montmartre. Inside Zelli's it was crowded, smoky, and noisy. The music hit you as you
went in. Brett and I danced. It was so crowded we could barely move. The nigger drummer waved at Brett. We were
caught in the jam, dancing in one place in front of him.
"Hahre you?"
"Great."
"Thaats good."
He was all teeth and lips.
"He's a great friend of mine," Brett said. "Damn good drummer."
The music stopped and we started toward the table where the count sat. Then the music started again and we
danced. I looked at the count. He was sitting at the table smoking a cigar. The music stopped again.
"Let's go over."
Brett started toward the table. The music started and again we danced, tight in the crowd.
"You are a rotten dancer, Jake. Michael's the best dancer I know."
"He's splendid."
"He's got his points."
"I like him," I said. "I'm damned fond of him."
"I'm going to marry him," Brett said. "Funny. I haven't thought about him for a week."
"Don't you write him?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Not I. Never write letters."
"I'll bet he writes to you."
"Rather. Damned good letters, too."
"When are you going to get married?"
"How do I know? As soon as we can get the divorce. Michael's trying to get his mother to put up for it."
"Could I help you?"
"Don't be an ass. Michael's people have loads of money."
The music stopped. We walked over to the table. The count stood up.
"Very nice," he said. "You looked very, very nice."
"Don't you dance, count?" I asked.
"No. I'm too old."
"Oh, come off it," Brett said.
"My dear, I would do it if I would enjoy it. I enjoy to watch you dance."
"Splendid," Brett said. "I'll dance again for you some time. I say. What about your little friend, Zizi?"
"Let me tell you. I support that boy, but I don't want to have him around."
"He is rather hard."
"You know I think that boy's got a future. But personally I don't want him around."
"Jake's rather the same way."
"He gives me the willys."
"Well," the count shrugged his shoulders. "About his future you can't ever tell. Anyhow, his father was a great
friend of my father."
"Come on. Let's dance," Brett said.
We danced. It was crowded and close.
"Oh, darling," Brett said, "I'm so miserable."
I had that feeling of going through something that has all happened before. "You were happy a minute ago."
The drummer shouted: "You can't two time--"
"It's all gone."
"What's the matter?"
"I don't know. I just feel terribly."
". . . . . ." the drummer chanted. Then turned to his sticks.
"Want to go?"
I had the feeling as in a nightmare of it all being something repeated, something I had been through and that
now I must go through again.
". . . . . ." the drummer sang softly.
"Let's go," said Brett. "You don't mind."
". . . . . ." the drummer shouted and grinned at Brett.
"All right," I said. We got out from the crowd. Brett went to the dressing-room.
"Brett wants to go," I said to the count. He nodded. "Does she? That's fine. You take the car. I'm going to stay
here for a while, Mr. Barnes."
We shook hands.
"It was a wonderful time," I said. "I wish you would let me get this." I took a note out of my pocket.
"Mr. Barnes, don't be ridiculous," the count said.
Brett came over with her wrap on. She kissed the count and put her hand on his shoulder to keep him from
standing up. As we went out the door I looked back and there were three girls at his table. We got into the big car.
http://www.en8848.com.cnBrett gave the chauffeur the address of her hotel.
"No, don't come up," she said at the hotel. She had rung and the door was unlatched.
"Really?"
"No. Please."
"Good night, Brett," I said. "I'm sorry you feel rotten."
"Good night, Jake. Good night, darling. I won't see you again." We kissed standing at the door. She pushed me
away. We kissed again. "Oh, don't!" Brett said.
She turned quickly and went into the hotel. The chauffeur drove me around to my flat. I gave him twenty
francs and he touched his cap and said: "Good night, sir," and drove off. I rang the bell. The door opened and I went
up-stairs and went to bed.
http://www.en8848.com.cnBook Two
8
I did not see Brett again until she came back from San Sebastian. One card came from her from there. It had a
picture of the Concha, and said: "Darling. Very quiet and healthy. Love to all the chaps.
BRETT."
Nor did I see Robert Cohn again. I heard Frances had left for England and I had a note from Cohn saying he
was going out in the country for a couple of weeks, he did not know where, but that he wanted to hold me to the
fishing-trip in Spain we had talked about last winter. I could reach him always, he wrote, through his bankers.
Brett was gone, I was not bothered by Cohn's troubles, I rather enjoyed not having to play tennis, there was
plenty of work to do, I went often to the races, dined with friends, and put in some extra time at the office getting
things ahead so I could leave it in charge of my secretary when Bill Gorton and I should shove off to Spain the end
of June. Bill Gorton arrived, put up a couple of days at the flat and went off to Vienna. He was very cheerful and
said the States were wonderful. New York was wonderful. There had been a grand theatrical season and a whole
crop of great young light heavyweights. Any one of them was a good prospect to grow up, put on weight and trim
Dempsey. Bill was very happy. He had made a lot of money on his last book, and was going to make a lot more. We
had a good time while he was in Paris, and then he went off to Vienna. He was coming back in three weeks and we
would leave for Spain to get in some fishing and go to the fiesta at Pamplona. He wrote that Vienna was wonderful.
Then a card from Budapest: "Jake, Budapest is wonderful." Then I got a wire: "Back on Monday."
Monday evening he turned up at the flat. I heard his taxi stop and went to the window and called to him; he
waved and started up-stairs carrying his bags. I met him on the stairs, and took one of the bags.
"Well," I said, "I hear you had a wonderful trip."
"Wonderful," he said. "Budapest is absolutely wonderful."
"How about Vienna?"
"Not so good, Jake. Not so good. It seemed better than it was."
"How do you mean?" I was getting glasses and a siphon.
"Tight, Jake. I was tight."
"That's strange. Better have a drink."
Bill rubbed his forehead. "Remarkable thing," he said. "Don't know how it happened. Suddenly it happened."
"Last long?"
"Four days, Jake. Lasted just four days."
"Where did you go?"
"Don't remember. Wrote you a post-card. Remember that perfectly."
"Do anything else?"
"Not so sure. Possible."
"Go on. Tell me about it."
"Can't remember. Tell you anything I could remember."
"Go on. Take that drink and remember."
"Might remember a little," Bill said. "Remember something about a prize-fight. Enormous Vienna prize-fight.
Had a nigger in it. Remember the nigger perfectly."
"Go on."
"Wonderful nigger. Looked like Tiger Flowers, only four times as big. All of a sudden everybody started to
throw things. Not me. Nigger'd just knocked local boy down. Nigger put up his glove. Wanted to make a speech.
http://www.en8848.com.cnAwful noble-looking nigger. Started to make a speech. Then local white boy hit him. Then he knocked white boy
cold. Then everybody commenced to throw chairs. Nigger went home with us in our car. Couldn't get his clothes.
Wore my coat. Remember the whole thing now. Big sporting evening."
"What happened?"
"Loaned the nigger some clothes and went around with him to try and get his money. Claimed nigger owed
them money on account of wrecking hall. Wonder who translated? Was it me?"
"Probably it wasn't you."
"You're right. Wasn't me at all. Was another fellow. Think we called him the local Harvard man. Remember
him now. Studying music."
"How'd you come out?"
"Not so good, Jake. Injustice everywhere. Promoter claimed nigger promised let local boy stay. Claimed
nigger violated contract. Can't knock out Vienna boy in Vienna. 'My God, Mister Gorton,' said nigger, 'I didn't do
nothing in there for forty minutes but try and let him stay. That white boy musta ruptured himself swinging at me. I
never did hit him.' "
"Did you get any money?"
"No money, Jake. All we could get was nigger's clothes. Somebody took his watch, too. Splendid nigger. Big
mistake to have come to Vienna. Not so good, Jake. Not so good."
"What became of the nigger?"
"Went back to Cologne. Lives there. Married. Got a family. Going to write me a letter and send me the money
I loaned him. Wonderful nigger. Hope I gave him the right address."
"You probably did."
"Well, anyway, let's eat," said Bill. "Unless you want me to tell you some more travel stories."
"Go on."
"Let's eat."
We went down-stairs and out onto the Boulevard St. Michel in the warm June evening.
"Where will we go?"
"Want to eat on the island?"
"Sure."
We walked down the Boulevard. At the juncture of the Rue Denfert-Rochereau with the Boulevard is a statue
of two men in flowing robes.
"I know who they are." Bill eyed the monument. "Gentlemen who invented pharmacy. Don't try and fool me
on Paris."
We went on.
"Here's a taxidermist's," Bill said. "Want to buy anything? Nice stuffed dog?"
"Come on," I said. "You're pie-eyed."
"Pretty nice stuffed dogs," Bill said. "Certainly brighten up your flat."
"Come on."
"Just one stuffed dog. I can take 'em or leave 'em alone. But listen, Jake. Just one stuffed dog."
"Come on."
"Mean everything in the world to you after you bought it. Simple exchange of values. You give them money.
They give you a stuffed dog."
"We'll get one on the way back."
"All right. Have it your own way. Road to hell paved with unbought stuffed dogs. Not my fault."
We went on.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"How'd you feel that way about dogs so sudden?"
"Always felt that way about dogs. Always been a great lover of stuffed animals."
We stopped and had a drink.
"Certainly like to drink," Bill said. "You ought to try it some times, Jake."
"You're about a hundred and forty-four ahead of me."
"Ought not to daunt you. Never be daunted. Secret of my success. Never been daunted. Never been daunted in
public."
"Where were you drinking?"
"Stopped at the Crillon. George made me a couple of Jack Roses. George's a great man. Know the secret of his
success? Never been daunted."
"You'll be daunted after about three more pernods."
"Not in public. If I begin to feel daunted I'll go off by myself. I'm like a cat that way."
"When did you see Harvey Stone?"
"At the Crillon. Harvey was just a little daunted. Hadn't eaten for three days. Doesn't eat any more. Just goes
off like a cat. Pretty sad."
"He's all right."
"Splendid. Wish he wouldn't keep going off like a cat, though. Makes me nervous."
"What'll we do to-night?"
"Doesn't make any difference. Only let's not get daunted. Suppose they got any hard-boiled eggs here? If they
had hard-boiled eggs here we wouldn't have to go all the way down to the island to eat."
"Nix," I said. "We're going to have a regular meal."
"Just a suggestion," said Bill. "Want to start now?"
"Come on."
We started on again down the Boulevard. A horse-cab passed us. Bill looked at it.
"See that horse-cab? Going to have that horse-cab stuffed for you for Christmas. Going to give all my friends
stuffed animals. I'm a nature-writer."
A taxi passed, some one in it waved, then banged for the driver to stop. The taxi backed up to the curb. In it
was Brett.
"Beautiful lady," said Bill. "Going to kidnap us."
"Hullo!" Brett said. "Hullo!"
"This is Bill Gorton. Lady Ashley."
Brett smiled at Bill. "I say I'm just back. Haven't bathed even. Michael comes in to-night."
"Good. Come on and eat with us, and we'll all go to meet him."
"Must clean myself."
"Oh, rot! Come on."
"Must bathe. He doesn't get in till nine."
"Come and have a drink, then, before you bathe."
"Might do that. Now you're not talking rot."
We got in the taxi. The driver looked around.
"Stop at the nearest bistro," I said.
"We might as well go to the Closerie," Brett said. "I can't drink these rotten brandies."
"Closerie des Lilas."
Brett turned to Bill.
"Have you been in this pestilential city long?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Just got in to-day from Budapest."
"How was Budapest?"
"Wonderful. Budapest was wonderful."
"Ask him about Vienna."
"Vienna," said Bill, "is a strange city."
"Very much like Paris," Brett smiled at him, wrinkling the corners of her eyes.
"Exactly," Bill said. "Very much like Paris at this moment."
"You have a good start."
Sitting out on the terraces of the Lilas Brett ordered a whiskey and soda, I took one, too, and Bill took another
pernod.
"How are you, Jake?"
"Great," I said. "I've had a good time."
Brett looked at me. "I was a fool to go away," she said. "One's an ass to leave Paris."
"Did you have a good time?"
"Oh, all right. Interesting. Not frightfully amusing."
"See anybody?"
"No, hardly anybody. I never went out."
"Didn't you swim?"
"No. Didn't do a thing."
"Sounds like Vienna," Bill said.
Brett wrinkled up the corners of her eyes at him.
"So that's the way it was in Vienna."
"It was like everything in Vienna."
Brett smiled at him again.
"You've a nice friend, Jake."
"He's all right," I said. "He's a taxidermist."
"That was in another country," Bill said. "And besides all the animals were dead."
"One more," Brett said, "and I must run. Do send the waiter for a taxi."
"There's a line of them. Right out in front."
"Good."
We had the drink and put Brett into her taxi.
"Mind you're at the Select around ten. Make him come. Michael will be there."
"We'll be there," Bill said. The taxi started and Brett waved.
"Quite a girl," Bill said. "She's damned nice. Who's Michael?"
"The man she's going to marry."
"Well, well," Bill said. "That's always just the stage I meet anybody. What'll I send them? Think they'd like a
couple of stuffed race-horses?"
"We better eat."
"Is she really Lady something or other?" Bill asked in the taxi on our way down to the Ile Saint Louis.
"Oh, yes. In the stud-book and everything."
"Well, well."
We ate dinner at Madame Lecomte's restaurant on the far side of the island. It was crowded with Americans
and we had to stand up and wait for a place. Some one had put it in the American Women's Club list as a quaint
restaurant on the Paris quais as yet untouched by Americans, so we had to wait forty-five minutes for a table. Bill
http://www.en8848.com.cnhad eaten at the restaurant in 1918, and right after the armistice, and Madame Lecomte made a great fuss over
seeing him.
"Doesn't get us a table, though," Bill said. "Grand woman, though."
We had a good meal, a roast chicken, new green beans, mashed potatoes, a salad, and some apple-pie and
cheese.
"You've got the world here all right," Bill said to Madame Lecomte. She raised her hand. "Oh, my God!"
"You'll be rich."
"I hope so."
After the coffee and a fine we got the bill, chalked up the same as ever on a slate, that was doubtless one of the
"quaint" features, paid it, shook hands, and went out.
"You never come here any more, Monsieur Barnes," Madame Lecomte said.
"Too many compatriots."
"Come at lunch-time. It's not crowded then."
"Good. I'll be down soon."
We walked along under the trees that grew out over the river on the Quai d'Orléans side of the island. Across
the river were the broken walls of old houses that were being torn down.
"They're going to cut a street through."
"They would," Bill said.
We walked on and circled the island. The river was dark and a bateau mouche went by, all bright with lights,
going fast and quiet up and out of sight under the bridge. Down the river was Notre Dame squatting against the
night sky. We crossed to the left bank of the Seine by the wooden foot-bridge from the Quai de Bethune, and
stopped on the bridge and looked down the river at Notre Dame. Standing on the bridge the island looked dark, the
houses were high against the sky, and the trees were shadows.
"It's pretty grand," Bill said. "God, I love to get back."
We leaned on the wooden rail of the bridge and looked up the river to the lights of the big bridges. Below the
water was smooth and black. It made no sound against the piles of the bridge. A man and a girl passed us. They
were walking with their arms around each other.
We crossed the bridge and walked up the Rue du Cardinal Lemoine. It was steep walking, and we went all the
way up to the Place Contrescarpe. The arc-light shone through the leaves of the trees in the square, and underneath
the trees was an S bus ready to start. Music came out of the door of the Negre Joyeux. Through the window of the
Café Aux Amateurs I saw the long zinc bar. Outside on the terrace working people were drinking. In the open
kitchen of the Amateurs a girl was cooking potato-chips in oil. There was an iron pot of stew. The girl ladled some
onto a plate for an old man who stood holding a bottle of red wine in one hand.
"Want to have a drink?"
"No," said Bill. "I don't need it."
We turned to the right off the Place Contrescarpe, walking along smooth narrow streets with high old houses
on both sides. Some of the houses jutted out toward the street. Others were cut back. We came onto the Rue du Pot
de Fer and followed it along until it brought us to the rigid north and south of the Rue Saint Jacques and then
walked south, past Val de Grace, set back behind the courtyard and the iron fence, to the Boulevard du Port Royal.
"What do you want to do?" I asked. "Go up to the café and see Brett and Mike?"
"Why not?"
We walked along Port Royal until it became Montparnasse, and then on past the Lilas, Lavigne's, and all the
little cafés, Damoy's, crossed the street to the Rotonde, past its lights and tables to the Select.
Michael came toward us from the tables. He was tanned and healthy-looking.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Hel-lo, Jake," he said. "Hel-lo! Hel-lo! How are you, old lad?"
"You look very fit, Mike."
"Oh, I am. I'm frightfully fit. I've done nothing but walk. Walk all day long. One drink a day with my mother
at tea."
Bill had gone into the bar. He was standing talking with Brett, who was sitting on a high stool, her legs
crossed. She had no stockings on.
"It's good to see you, Jake," Michael said. "I'm a little tight you know. Amazing, isn't it? Did you see my
nose?"
There was a patch of dried blood on the bridge of his nose.
"An old lady's bags did that," Mike said. "I reached up to help her with them and they fell on me."
Brett gestured at him from the bar with her cigarette-holder and wrinkled the corners of her eyes.
"An old lady," said Mike. "Her bags fell on me. Let's go in and see Brett. I say, she is a piece. You are a lovely
lady, Brett. Where did you get that hat?"
"Chap bought it for me. Don't you like it?"
"It's a dreadful hat. Do get a good hat."
"Oh, we've so much money now," Brett said. "I say, haven't you met Bill yet? You _are_ a lovely host, Jake."
She turned to Mike. "This is Bill Gorton. This drunkard is Mike Campbell. Mr. Campbell is an undischarged
bankrupt."
"Aren't I, though? You know I met my ex-partner yesterday in London. Chap who did me in."
"What did he say?"
"Bought me a drink. I thought I might as well take it. I say, Brett, you are a lovely piece. Don't you think she's
beautiful?"
"Beautiful. With this nose?"
"It's a lovely nose. Go on, point it at me. Isn't she a lovely piece?"
"Couldn't we have kept the man in Scotland?"
"I say, Brett, let's turn in early."
"Don't be indecent, Michael. Remember there are ladies at this bar."
"Isn't she a lovely piece? Don't you think so, Jake?"
"There's a fight to-night," Bill said. "Like to go?"
"Fight," said Mike. "Who's fighting?"
"Ledoux and somebody."
"He's very good, Ledoux," Mike said. "I'd like to see it, rather"--he was making an effort to pull himself
together--"but I can't go. I had a date with this thing here. I say, Brett, do get a new hat."
Brett pulled the felt hat down far over one eye and smiled out from under it. "You two run along to the fight.
I'll have to be taking Mr. Campbell home directly."
"I'm not tight," Mike said. "Perhaps just a little. I say, Brett, you are a lovely piece."
"Go on to the fight," Brett said. "Mr. Campbell's getting difficult. What are these outbursts of affection,
Michael?"
"I say, you are a lovely piece."
We said good night. "I'm sorry I can't go," Mike said. Brett laughed. I looked back from the door. Mike had
one hand on the bar and was leaning toward Brett, talking. Brett was looking at him quite coolly, but the corners of
her eyes were smiling.
Outside on the pavement I said: "Do you want to go to the fight?"
"Sure," said Bill. "If we don't have to walk."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Mike was pretty excited about his girl friend," I said in the taxi.
"Well," said Bill. "You can't blame him such a hell of a lot."
http://www.en8848.com.cn9
The Ledoux-Kid Francis fight was the night of the 20th of June. It was a good fight. The morning after the
fight I had a letter from Robert Cohn, written from Hendaye. He was having a very quiet time, he said, bathing,
playing some golf and much bridge. Hendaye had a splendid beach, but he was anxious to start on the fishing-trip.
When would I be down? If I would buy him a double-tapered line he would pay me when I came down.
That same morning I wrote Cohn from the office that Bill and I would leave Paris on the 25th unless I wired
him otherwise, and would meet him at Bayonne, where we could get a bus over the mountains to Pamplona. The
same evening about seven o'clock I stopped in at the Select to see Michael and Brett. They were not there, and I
went over to the Dingo. They were inside sitting at the bar.
"Hello, darling." Brett put out her hand.
"Hello, Jake," Mike said. "I understand I was tight last night."
"Weren't you, though," Brett said. "Disgraceful business."
"Look," said Mike, "when do you go down to Spain? Would you mind if we came down with you?"
"It would be grand."
"You wouldn't mind, really? I've been at Pamplona, you know. Brett's mad to go. You're sure we wouldn't just
be a bloody nuisance?"
"Don't talk like a fool."
"I'm a little tight, you know. I wouldn't ask you like this if I weren't. You're sure you don't mind?"
"Oh, shut up, Michael," Brett said. "How can the man say he'd mind now? I'll ask him later."
"But you don't mind, do you?"
"Don't ask that again unless you want to make me sore. Bill and I go down on the morning of the 25th."
"By the way, where is Bill?" Brett asked.
"He's out at Chantilly dining with some people."
"He's a good chap."
"Splendid chap," said Mike. "He is, you know."
"You don't remember him," Brett said.
"I do. Remember him perfectly. Look, Jake, we'll come down the night of the 25th. Brett can't get up in the
morning."
"Indeed not!"
"If our money comes and you're sure you don't mind."
"It will come, all right. I'll see to that."
"Tell me what tackle to send for."
"Get two or three rods with reels, and lines, and some flies."
"I won't fish," Brett put in.
"Get two rods, then, and Bill won't have to buy one."
"Right," said Mike. "I'll send a wire to the keeper."
"Won't it be splendid," Brett said. "Spain! We _will_ have fun."
"The 25th. When is that?"
"Saturday."
"We _will_ have to get ready."
"I say," said Mike, "I'm going to the barber's."
"I must bathe," said Brett. "Walk up to the hotel with me, Jake. Be a good chap."
"We _have_ got the loveliest hotel," Mike said. "I think it's a brothel!"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"We left our bags here at the Dingo when we got in, and they asked us at this hotel if we wanted a room for
the afternoon only. Seemed frightfully pleased we were going to stay all night."
"_I_ believe it's a brothel," Mike said. "And _I_ should know."
"Oh, shut it and go and get your hair cut."
Mike went out. Brett and I sat on at the bar.
"Have another?"
"Might."
"I needed that," Brett said.
We walked up the Rue Delambre.
"I haven't seen you since I've been back," Brett said.
"No."
"How _are_ you, Jake?"
"Fine."
Brett looked at me. "I say," she said, "is Robert Cohn going on this trip?"
"Yes. Why?"
"Don't you think it will be a bit rough on him?"
"Why should it?"
"Who did you think I went down to San Sebastian with?"
"Congratulations," I said.
We walked along.
"What did you say that for?"
"I don't know. What would you like me to say?"
We walked along and turned a corner.
"He behaved rather well, too. He gets a little dull."
"Does he?"
"I rather thought it would be good for him."
"You might take up social service."
"Don't be nasty."
"I won't."
"Didn't you really know?"
"No," I said. "I guess I didn't think about it."
"Do you think it will be too rough on him?"
"That's up to him," I said. "Tell him you're coming. He can always not come."
"I'll write him and give him a chance to pull out of it."
I did not see Brett again until the night of the 24th of June.
"Did you hear from Cohn?"
"Rather. He's keen about it."
"My God!"
"I thought it was rather odd myself."
"Says he can't wait to see me."
"Does he think you're coming alone?"
"No. I told him we were all coming down together. Michael and all."
"He's wonderful."
"Isn't he?"
http://www.en8848.com.cnThey expected their money the next day. We arranged to meet at Pamplona. They would go directly to San
Sebastian and take the train from there. We would all meet at the Montoya in Pamplona. If they did not turn up on
Monday at the latest we would go on ahead up to Burguete in the mountains, to start fishing. There was a bus to
Burguete. I wrote out an itinerary so they could follow us.
Bill and I took the morning train from the Gare d'Orsay. It was a lovely day, not too hot, and the country was
beautiful from the start. We went back into the diner and had breakfast. Leaving the dining-car I asked the conductor
for tickets for the first service.
"Nothing until the fifth."
"What's this?"
There were never more than two servings of lunch on that train, and always plenty of places for both of them.
"They're all reserved," the dining-car conductor said. "There will be a fifth service at three-thirty."
"This is serious," I said to Bill.
"Give him ten francs."
"Here," I said. "We want to eat in the first service."
The conductor put the ten francs in his pocket.
"Thank you," he said. "I would advise you gentlemen to get some sandwiches. All the places for the first four
services were reserved at the office of the company."
"You'll go a long way, brother," Bill said to him in English. "I suppose if I'd given you five francs you would
have advised us to jump off the train."
"_Comment?_"
"Go to hell!" said Bill. "Get the sandwiches made and a bottle of wine. You tell him, Jake."
"And send it up to the next car." I described where we were.
In our compartment were a man and his wife and their young son.
"I suppose you're Americans, aren't you?" the man asked. "Having a good trip?"
"Wonderful," said Bill.
"That's what you want to do. Travel while you're young. Mother and I always wanted to get over, but we had
to wait a while."
"You could have come over ten years ago, if you'd wanted to," the wife said. "What you always said was: 'See
America first!' I will say we've seen a good deal, take it one way and another."
"Say, there's plenty of Americans on this train," the husband said. "They've got seven cars of them from
Dayton, Ohio. They've been on a pilgrimage to Rome, and now they're going down to Biarritz and Lourdes."
"So, that's what they are. Pilgrims. Goddam Puritans," Bill said.
"What part of the States you boys from?"
"Kansas City," I said. "He's from Chicago."
"You both going to Biarritz?"
"No. We're going fishing in Spain."
"Well, I never cared for it, myself. There's plenty that do out where I come from, though. We got some of the
best fishing in the State of Montana. I've been out with the boys, but I never cared for it any."
"Mighty little fishing you did on them trips," his wife said.
He winked at us.
"You know how the ladies are. If there's a jug goes along, or a case of beer, they think it's hell and damnation."
"That's the way men are," his wife said to us. She smoothed her comfortable lap. "I voted against prohibition
to please him, and because I like a little beer in the house, and then he talks that way. It's a wonder they ever find
any one to marry them."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Say," said Bill, "do you know that gang of Pilgrim Fathers have cornered the dining-car until half past three
this afternoon?"
"How do you mean? They can't do a thing like that."
"You try and get seats."
"Well, mother, it looks as though we better go back and get another breakfast."
She stood up and straightened her dress.
"Will you boys keep an eye on our things? Come on, Hubert."
They all three went up to the wagon restaurant. A little while after they were gone a steward went through
announcing the first service, and pilgrims, with their priests, commenced filing down the corridor. Our friend and
his family did not come back. A waiter passed in the corridor with our sandwiches and the bottle of Chablis, and we
called him in.
"You're going to work to-day," I said.
He nodded his head. "They start now, at ten-thirty."
"When do we eat?"
"Huh! When do I eat?"
He left two glasses for the bottle, and we paid him for the sandwiches and tipped him.
"I'll get the plates," he said, "or bring them with you."
We ate the sandwiches and drank the Chablis and watched the country out of the window. The grain was just
beginning to ripen and the fields were full of poppies. The pastureland was green, and there were fine trees, and
sometimes big rivers and chateaux off in the trees.
At Tours we got off and bought another bottle of wine, and when we got back in the compartment the
gentleman from Montana and his wife and his son, Hubert, were sitting comfortably.
"Is there good swimming in Biarritz?" asked Hubert.
"That boy's just crazy till he can get in the watei" his mother said. "It's pretty hard on youngsters travelling."
"There's good swimming," I said. "But it's dangerous when it's rough."
"Did you get a meal?" Bill asked.
"We sure did. We set right there when they started to come in, and they must have just thought we were in the
party. One of the waiters said something to us in French, and then they just sent three of them back."
"They thought we were snappers, all right," the man said. "It certainly shows you the power of the Catholic
Church. It's a pity you boys ain't Catholics. You could get a meal, then, all right."
"I am," I said. "That's what makes me so sore."
Finally at a quarter past four we had lunch. Bill had been rather difficult at the last. He buttonholed a priest
who was coming back with one of the returning streams of pilgrims.
"When do us Protestants get a chance to eat, father?"
"I don't know anything about it. Haven't you got tickets?"
"It's enough to make a man join the Klan," Bill said. The priest looked back at him.
Inside the dining-car the waiters served the fifth successive table d'hôte meal. The waiter who served us was
soaked through. His white jacket was purple under the arms.
"He must drink a lot of wine."
"Or wear purple undershirts."
"Let's ask him."
"No. He's too tired."
The train stopped for half an hour at Bordeaux and we went out through the station for a little walk. There was
not time to get in to the town. Afterward we passed through the Landes and watched the sun set. There were wide
http://www.en8848.com.cnfire-gaps cut through the pines, and you could look up them like avenues and see wooded hills way off. About
seven-thirty we had dinner and watched the country through the open window in the diner. It was all sandy pine
country full of heather. There were little clearings with houses in them, and once in a while we passed a sawmill. It
got dark and we could feel the country hot and sandy and dark outside of the window, and about nine o'clock we got
into Bayonne. The man and his wife and Hubert all shook hands with us. They were going on to LaNegresse to
change for Biarritz.
"Well, I hope you have lots of luck," he said.
"Be careful about those bull-fights."
"Maybe we'll see you at Biarritz," Hubert said.
We got off with our bags and rod-cases and passed through the dark station and out to the lights and the line of
cabs and hotel buses. There, standing with the hotel runners, was Robert Cohn. He did not see us at first. Then he
started forward.
"Hello, Jake. Have a good trip?"
"Fine," I said. "This is Bill Gorton."
"How are you?"
"Come on," said Robert. "I've got a cab." He was a little near-sighted. I had never noticed it before. He was
looking at Bill, trying to make him out. He was shy, too.
"We'll go up to my hotel. It's all right. It's quite nice."
We got into the cab, and the cabman put the bags up on the seat beside him and climbed up and cracked his
whip, and we drove over the dark bridge and into the town.
"I'm awfully glad to meet you," Robert said to Bill. "I've heard so much about you from Jake and I've read
your books. Did you get my line, Jake?"
The cab stopped in front of the hotel and we all got out and went in. It was a nice hotel, and the people at the
desk were very cheerful, and we each had a good small room.
http://www.en8848.com.cn10
In the morning it was bright, and they were sprinkling the streets of the town, and we all had breakfast in a
café. Bayonne is a nice town. It is like a very clean Spanish town and it is on a big river. Already, so early in the
morning, it was very hot on the bridge across the river. We walked out on the bridge and then took a walk through
the town.
I was not at all sure Mike's rods would come from Scotland in time, so we hunted a tackle store and finally
bought a rod for Bill up-stairs over a drygoods store. The man who sold the tackle was out, and we had to wait for
him to come back. Finally he came in, and we bought a pretty good rod cheap, and two landing-nets.
We went out into the street again and took a look at the cathedral. Cohn made some remark about it being a
very good example of something or other, I forget what. It seemed like a nice cathedral, nice and dim, like Spanish
churches. Then we went up past the old fort and out to the local Syndicat d'Initiative office, where the bus was
supposed to start from. There they told us the bus service did not start until the 1st of July. We found out at the
tourist office what we ought to pay for a motor-car to Pamplona and hired one at a big garage just around the corner
from the Municipal Theatre for four hundred francs. The car was to pick us up at the hotel in forty minutes, and we
stopped at the café on the square where we had eaten breakfast, and had a beer. It was hot, but the town had a cool,
fresh, early-morning smell and it was pleasant sitting in the café. A breeze started to blow, and you could feel that
the air came from the sea. There were pigeons out in the square, and the houses were a yellow, sun-baked color, and
I did not want to leave the café. But we had to go to the hotel to get our bags packed and pay the bill. We paid for
the beers, we matched and I think Cohn paid, and went up to the hotel. It was only sixteen francs apiece for Bill and
me, with ten per cent added for the service, and we had the bags sent down and waited for Robert Cohn. While we
were waiting I saw a cockroach on the parquet floor that must have been at least three inches long. I pointed him out
to Bill and then put my shoe on him. We agreed he must have just come in from the garden. It was really an awfully
clean hotel.
Cohn came down, finally, and we all went out to the car. It was a big, closed car, with a driver in a white
duster with blue collar and cuffs, and we had him put the back of the car down. He piled in the bags and we started
off up the street and out of the town. We passed some lovely gardens and had a good look back at the town, and then
we were out in the country, green and rolling, and the road climbing all the time. We passed lots of Basques with
oxen, or cattle, hauling carts along the road, and nice farmhouses, low roofs, and all white-plastered. In the Basque
country the land all looks very rich and green and the houses and villages look well-off and clean. Every village had
a pelota court and on some of them kids were playing in the hot sun. There were signs on the walls of the churches
saying it was forbidden to play pelota against them, and the houses in the villages had red tiled roofs, and then the
road turned off and commenced to climb and we were going way up close along a hillside, with a valley below and
hills stretched off back toward the sea. You couldn't see the sea. It was too far away. You could see only hills and
more hills, and you knew where the sea was.
We crossed the Spanish frontier. There was a little stream and a bridge, and Spanish carabineers, with
patent-leather Bonaparte hats, and short guns on their backs, on one side, and on the other fat Frenchmen in kepis
and mustaches. They only opened one bag and took the passports in and looked at them. There was a general store
and inn on each side of the line. The chauffeur had to go in and fill out some papers about the car and we got out
and went over to the stream to see if there were any trout. Bill tried to talk some Spanish to one of the carabineers,
but it did not go very well. Robert Cohn asked, pointing with his finger, if there were any trout in the stream, and the
carabineer said yes, but not many.
I asked him if he ever fished, and he said no, that he didn't care for it.
Just then an old man with long, sunburned hair and beard, and clothes that looked as though they were made
http://www.en8848.com.cnof gunny-sacking, came striding up to the bridge. He was carrying a long staff, and he had a kid slung on his back,
tied by the four legs, the head hanging down.
The carabineer waved him back with his sword. The man turned without saying anything, and started back up
the white road into Spain.
"What's the matter with the old one?" I asked.
"He hasn't got any passport."
I offered the guard a cigarette. He took it and thanked me.
"What will he do?" I asked.
The guard spat in the dust.
"Oh, he'll just wade across the stream."
"Do you have much smuggling?"
"Oh," he said, "they go through."
The chauffeur came out, folding up the papers and putting them in the inside pocket of his coat. We all got in
the car and it started up the white dusty road into Spain. For a while the country was much as it had been; then,
climbing all the time, we crossed the top of a Col, the road winding back and forth on itself, and then it was really
Spain. There were long brown mountains and a few pines and far-off forests of beech-trees on some of the
mountainsides. The road went along the summit of the Col and then dropped down, and the driver had to honk, and
slow up, and turn out to avoid running into two donkeys that were sleeping in the road. We came down out of the
mountains and through an oak forest, and there were white cattle grazing in the forest. Down below there were
grassy plains and clear streams, and then we crossed a stream and went through a gloomy little village, and started
to climb again. We climbed up and up and crossed another high Col and turned along it, and the road ran down to
the right, and we saw a whole new range of mountains off to the south, all brown and baked-looking and furrowed
in strange shapes.
After a while we came out of the mountains, and there were trees along both sides of the road, and a stream
and ripe fields of grain, and the road went on, very white and straight ahead, and then lifted to a little rise, and off on
the left was a hill with an old castle, with buildings close around it and a field of grain going right up to the walls
and shifting in the wind. I was up in front with the driver and I turned around. Robert Cohn was asleep, but Bill
looked and nodded his head. Then we crossed a wide plain, and there was a big river off on the right shining in the
sun from between the line of trees, and away off you could see the plateau of Pamplona rising out of the plain, and
the walls of the city, and the great brown cathedral, and the broken skyline of the other churches. In back of the
plateau were the mountains, and every way you looked there were other mountains, and ahead the road stretched out
white across the plain going toward Pamplona.
We came into the town on the other side of the plateau, the road slanting up steeply and dustily with
shade-trees on both sides, and then levelling out through the new part of town they are building up outside the old
walls. We passed the bull-ring, high and white and concrete-looking in the sun, and then came into the big square by
a side street and stopped in front of the Hotel Montoya.
The driver helped us down with the bags. There was a crowd of kids watching the car, and the square was hot,
and the trees were green, and the flags hung on their staffs, and it was good to get out of the sun and under the shade
of the arcade that runs all the way around the square. Montoya was glad to see us, and shook hands and gave us
good rooms looking out on the square, and then we washed and cleaned up and went down-stairs in the dining-room
for lunch. The driver stayed for lunch, too, and afterward we paid him and he started back to Bayonne.
There are two dining-rooms in the Montoya. One is up-stairs on the second floor and looks out on the square.
The other is down one floor below the level of the square and has a door that opens on the back street that the bulls
pass along when they run through the streets early in the morning on their way to the ring. It is always cool in the
http://www.en8848.com.cndown-stairs dining-room and we had a very good lunch. The first meal in Spain was always a shock with the hors
d'ceuvres, an egg course, two meat courses, vegetables, salad, and dessert and fruit. You have to drink plenty of
wine to get it all down. Robert Cohn tried to say he did not want any of the second meat course, but we would not
interpret for him, and so the waitress brought him something else as a replacement, a plate of cold meats, I think.
Cohn had been rather nervous ever since we had met at Bayonne. He did not know whether we knew Brett had been
with him at San Sebastian, and it made him rather awkward.
"Well," I said, "Brett and Mike ought to get in to-night."
"I'm not sure they'll come," Cohn said.
"Why not?" Bill said. "Of course they'll come."
"They're always late," I said.
"I rather think they're not coming," Robert Cohn said.
He said it with an air of superior knowledge that irritated both of us.
"I'll bet you fifty pesetas they're here to-night," Bill said. He always bets when he is angered, and so he usually
bets foolishly.
"I'll take it," Cohn said. "Good. You remember it, Jake. Fifty pesetas."
"I'll remember it myself," Bill said. I saw he was angry and wanted to smooth him down.
"It's a sure thing they'll come," I said. "But maybe not tonight."
"Want to call it off?" Cohn asked.
"No. Why should I? Make it a hundred if you like."
"All right. I'll take that."
"That's enough," I said. "Or you'll have to make a book and give me some of it."
"I'm satisfied," Cohn said. He smiled. "You'll probably win it back at bridge, anyway."
"You haven't got it yet," Bill said.
We went out to walk around under the arcade to the Café Irufla for coffee. Cohn said he was going over and
get a shave.
"Say," Bill said to me, "have I got any chance on that bet?"
"You've got a rotten chance. They've never been on time anywhere. If their money doesn't come it's a cinch
they won't get in tonight."
"I was sorry as soon as I opened my mouth. But I had to call him. He's all right, I guess, but where does he get
this inside stuff? Mike and Brett fixed it up with us about coming down here."
I saw Cohn coming over across the square.
"Here he comes."
"Well, let him not get superior and Jewish."
"The barber shop's closed," Cohn said. "It's not open till four."
We had coffee at the Iruña, sitting in comfortable wicker chairs looking out from the cool of the arcade at the
big square. After a while Bill went to write some letters and Cohn went over to the barber-shop. It was still closed,
so he decided to go up to the hotel and get a bath, and I sat out in front of the café and then went for a walk in the
town. It was very hot, but I kept on the shady side of the streets and went through the market and had a good time
seeing the town again. I went to the Ayuntamiento and found the old gentleman who subscribes for the bull-fight
tickets for me every year, and he had gotten the money I sent him from Paris and renewed my subscriptions, so that
was all set. He was the archivist, and all the archives of the town were in his office. That has nothing to do with the
story. Anyway, his office had a green baize door and a big wooden door, and when I went out I left him sitting
among the archives that covered all the walls, and I shut both the doors, and as I went out of the building into the
street the porter stopped me to brush off my coat.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"You must have been in a motor-car," he said.
The back of the collar and the upper part of the shoulders were gray with dust.
"From Bayonne."
"Well, well," he said. "I knew you were in a motor-car from the way the dust was." So I gave him two copper
coins.
At the end of the street I saw the cathedral and walked up toward it. The first time I ever saw it I thought the
facade was ugly but I liked it now. I went inside. It was dim and dark and the pillars went high up, and there were
people praying, and it smelt of incense, and there were some wonderful big windows. I knelt and started to pray and
prayed for everybody I thought of, Brett and Mike and Bill and Robert Cohn and myself, and all the bull-fighters,
separately for the ones I liked, and lumping all the rest, then I prayed for myself again, and while I was praying for
myself I found I was getting sleepy, so I prayed that the bull-fights would be good, and that it would be a fine fiesta,
and that we would get some fishing. I wondered if there was anything else I might pray foi and I thought I would
like to have some money, so I prayed that I would make a lot of money, and then I started to think how I would
make it, and thinking of making money reminded me of the count, and I started wondering about where he was, and
regretting I hadn't seen him since that night in Montmartre, and about something funny Brett told me about him, and
as all the time I was kneeling with my forehead on the wood in front of me, and was thinking of myself as praying, I
was a little ashamed, and regretted that I was such a rotten Catholic, but realized there was nothing I could do about
it, at least for a while, and maybe never, but that anyway it was a grand religion, and I only wished I felt religious
and maybe I would the next time; and then I was out in the hot sun on the steps of the cathedral, and the forefingers
and the thumb of my right hand were still damp, and I felt them dry in the sun. The sunlight was hot and hard, and I
crossed over beside some buildings, and walked back along sidestreets to the hotel.
At dinner that night we found that Robert Cohn had taken a bath, had had a shave and a haircut and a shampoo,
and something put on his hair afterward to make it stay down. He was nervous, and I did not try to help him any.
The train was due in at nine o'clock from San Sebastian, and, if Brett and Mike were coming, they would be on it.
At twenty minutes to nine we were not half through dinner. Robert Cohn got up from the table and said he would go
to the station. I said I would go with him, just to devil him. Bill said he would be damned if he would leave his
dinner. I said we would be right back.
We walked to the station. I was enjoying Cohn's nervousness. I hoped Brett would be on the train. At the
station the train was late, and we sat on a baggage-truck and waited outside in the dark. I have never seen a man in
civil life as nervous as Robert Cohn--nor as eager. I was enjoying it. It was lousy to enjoy it, but I felt lousy. Cohn
had a wonderful quality of bringing out the worst in anybody.
After a while we heard the train-whistle way off below on the other side of the plateau, and then we saw the
headlight coming up the hill. We went inside the station and stood with a crowd of people just back of the gates, and
the train came in and stopped, and everybody started coming out through the gates.
They were not in the crowd. We waited till everybody had gone through and out of the station and gotten into
buses, or taken cabs, or were walking with their friends or relatives through the dark into the town.
"I knew they wouldn't come," Robert said. We were going back to the hotel.
"I thought they might," I said.
Bill was eating fruit when we came in and finishing a bottle of wine.
"Didn't come, eh?"
"No."
"Do you mind if I give you that hundred pesetas in the morning, Cohn?" Bill asked. "I haven't changed any
money here yet."
"Oh, forget about it," Robert Cohn said. "Let's bet on something else. Can you bet on bull-fights?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"You could," Bill said, "but you don't need to."
"It would be like betting on the war," I said. "You don't need any economic interest."
"I'm very curious to see them," Robert said.
Montoya came up to our table. He had a telegram in his hand. "It's for you." He handed it to me.
It read: "Stopped night San Sebastian."
"It's from them," I said. I put it in my pocket. Ordinarily I should have handed it over.
"They've stopped over in San Sebastian," I said. "Send their regards to you."
Why I felt that impulse to devil him I do not know. Of course I do know. I was blind, unforgivingly jealous of
what had happened to him. The fact that I took it as a matter of course did not alter that any. I certainly did hate him.
I do not think I ever really hated him until he had that little spell of superiority at lunch--that and when he went
through all that barbering. So I put the telegram in my pocket. The telegram came to me, anyway.
"Well," I said. "We ought to pull out on the noon bus for Burguete. They can follow us if they get in
to-morrow night."
There were only two trains up from San Sebastian, an early morning train and the one we had just met.
"That sounds like a good idea," Cohn said.
"The sooner we get on the stream the better."
"It's all one to me when we start," Bill said. "The sooner the better."
We sat in the Irufla for a while and had coffee and then took a little walk out to the bull-ring and across the
field and under the trees at the edge of the cliff and looked down at the river in the dark, and I turned in early. Bill
and Cohn stayed out in the café quite late, I believe, because I was asleep when they came in.
In the morning I bought three tickets for the bus to Burguete. It was scheduled to leave at two o'clock. There
was nothing earlier. I was sitting over at the Irufla reading the papers when I saw Robert Cohn coming across the
square. He came up to the table and sat down in one of the wicker chairs.
"This is a comfortable café," he said. "Did you have a good night, Jake?"
"I slept like a log."
"I didn't sleep very well. Bill and I were out late, too."
"Where were you?"
"Here. And after it shut we went over to that other café. The old man there speaks German and English."
"The Café Suizo."
"That's it. He seems like a nice old fellow. I think it's a better café than this one."
"It's not so good in the daytime," I said. "Too hot. By the way, I got the bus tickets."
"I'm not going up to-day. You and Bill go on ahead."
"I've got your ticket."
"Give it to me. I'll get the money back."
"It's five pesetas."
Robert Cohn took out a silver five-peseta piece and gave it to me.
"I ought to stay," he said. "You see I'm afraid there's some sort of misunderstanding."
"Why," I said. "They may not come here for three or four days now if they start on parties at San Sebastian."
"That's just it," said Robert. "I'm afraid they expected to meet me at San Sebastian, and that's why they
stopped over."
"What makes you think that?"
"Well, I wrote suggesting it to Brett."
"Why in hell didn't you stay there and meet them, then?" I started to say, but I stopped. I thought that idea
would come to him by itself, but I do not believe it ever did.
http://www.en8848.com.cnHe was being confidential now and it was giving him pleasure to be able to talk with the understanding that I
knew there was something between him and Brett.
"Well, Bill and I will go up right after lunch," I said.
"I wish I could go. We've been looking forward to this fishing all winter." He was being sentimental about it.
"But I ought to stay. I really ought. As soon as they come I'll bring them right up."
"Let's find Bill."
"I want to go over to the barber-shop."
"See you at lunch."
I found Bill up in his room. He was shaving.
"Oh, yes, he told me all about it last night," Bill said. "He's a great little confider. He said he had a date with
Brett at San Sebastian."
"The lying bastard!"
"Oh, no," said Bill. "Don't get sore. Don't get sore at this stage of the trip. How did you ever happen to know
this fellow anyway?"
"Don't rub it in."
Bill looked around, half-shaved, and then went on talking into the mirror while he lathered his face.
"Didn't you send him with a letter to me in New York last winter? Thank God, I'm a travelling man. Haven't
you got some more Jewish friends you could bring along?" He rubbed his chin with his thumb, looked at it, and then
started scraping again.
"You've got some fine ones yourself."
"Oh, yes. I've got some darbs. But not alongside of this Robert Cohn. The funny thing is he's nice, too. I like
him. But he's just so awful."
"He can be damn nice."
"I know it. That's the terrible part."
I laughed.
"Yes. Go on and laugh," said Bill. "You weren't out with him last night until two o'clock."
"Was he very bad?"
"Awful. What's all this about him and Brett, anyway? Did she ever have anything to do with him?"
He raised his chin up and pulled it from side to side.
"Sure. She went down to San Sebastian with him."
"What a damn-fool thing to do. Why did she do that?"
"She wanted to get out of town and she can't go anywhere alone. She said she thought it would be good for
him."
"What bloody-fool things people do. Why didn't she go off with some of her own people? Or you?"--he
slurred that over--"or me? Why not me?" He looked at his face carefully in the glass, put a big dab of lather on each
cheek-bone. "It's an honest face. It's a face any woman would be safe with."
"She'd never seen it."
"She should have. All women should see it. It's a face that ought to be thrown on every screen in the country.
Every woman ought to be given a copy of this face as she leaves the altar. Mothers should tell their daughters about
this face. My son"--he pointed the razor at me--"go west with this face and grow up with the country."
He ducked down to the bowl, rinsed his face with cold water, put on some alcohol, and then looked at himself
carefully in the glass, pulling down his long upper lip.
My God. he said, isn't it an awful face?
He looked in the glass.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"And as for this Robert Cohn," Bill said, "he makes me sick, and he can go to hell, and I'm damn glad he's
staying here so we won't have him fishing with us."
"You're damn right."
"We're going trout-fishing. We're going trout-fishing in the Irati River, and we're going to get tight now at
lunch on the wine of the country, and then take a swell bus ride."
"Come on. Let's go over to the Irufla and start," I said.
http://www.en8848.com.cn11
It was baking hot in the square when we came out after lunch with our bags and the rod-case to go to Burguete.
People were on top of the bus, and others were climbing up a ladder. Bill went up and Robert sat beside Bill to save
a place for me, and I went back in the hotel to get a couple of bottles of wine to take with us. When I came out the
bus was crowded. Men and women were sitting on all the baggage and boxes on top, and the women all had their
fans going in the sun. It certainiy was hot. Robert climbed down and I fitted into the place he had saved on the one
wooden seat that ran across the top.
Robert Cohn stood in the shade of the arcade waiting for us to start. A Basque with a big leather wine-bag in
his lap lay across the top of the bus in front of our seat, leaning back against our legs. He offered the wine-skin to
Bill and to me, and when I tipped it up to drink he imitated the sound of a klaxon motor-horn so well and so
suddenly that I spilled some of the wine, and everybody laughed. He apologized and made me take another drink.
He made the klaxon again a little later, and it fooled me the second time. He was very good at it. The Basques liked
it. The man next to Bill was talking to him in Spanish and Bill was not getting it, so he offered the man one of the
bottles of wine. The man waved it away. He said it was too hot and he had drunk too much at lunch. When Bill
offered the bottle the second time he took a long drink, and then the bottle went all over that part of the bus. Every
one took a drink very politely, and then they made us cork it up and put it away. They all wanted us to drink from
their leather wine-bottles. They were peasants going up into the hills.
Finally, after a couple more false klaxons, the bus started, and Robert Cohn waved good-by to us, and all the
Basques waved goodby to him. As soon as we started out on the road outside of town it was cool. It felt nice riding
high up and close under the trees. The bus went quite fast and made a good breeze, and as we went out along the
road with the dust powdering the trees and down the hill, we had a fine view, back through the trees, of the town
rising up from the bluff above the river. The Basque lying against my knees pointed out the view with the neck of
the wine-bottle, and winked at us. He nodded his head.
"Pretty nice, eh?"
"These Basques are swell people," Bill said.
The Basque lying against my legs was tanned the color of saddleleather. He wore a black smock like all the
rest. There were wrinkles in his tanned neck. He turned around and offered his wine-bag to Bill. Bill handed him
one of our bottles. The Basque wagged a forefinger at him and handed the bottle back, slapping in the cork with the
palm of his hand. He shoved the wine-bag up.
"Arriba! Arriba!" he said. "Lift it up."
Bill raised the wine-skin and let the stream of wine spurt out and into his mouth, his head tipped back. When
he stopped drinking and tipped the leather bottle down a few drops ran down his chin.
"No! No!" several Basques said. "Not like that." One snatched the bottle away from the owner, who was
himself about to give a demonstration. He was a young fellow and he held the wine-bottle at full arms' length and
raised it high up, squeezing the leather bag with his hand so the stream of wine hissed into his mouth. He held the
bag out there, the wine making a flat, hard trajectory into his mouth, and he kept on swallowing smoothly and
regularly.
"Hey!" the owner of the bottle shouted. "Whose wine is that?"
The drinker waggled his little finger at him and smiled at us with his eyes. Then he bit the stream off sharp,
made a quick lift with the wine-bag and lowered it down to the owner. He winked at us. The owner shook the
wine-skin sadly.
We passed through a town and stopped in front of the posada, and the driver took on several packages. Then
we started on again, and outside the town the road commenced to mount. We were going through farming country
http://www.en8848.com.cnwith rocky hills that sloped down into the fields. The grain-fields went up the hillsides. Now as we went higher
there was a wind blowing the grain. The road was white and dusty, and the dust rose under the wheels and hung in
the air behind us. The road climbed up into the hills and left the rich grain-fields below. Now there were only
patches of grain on the bare hillsides and on each side of the water-courses. We turned sharply out to the side of the
road to give room to pass to a long string of six mules, following one after the other, hauling a high-hooded wagon
loaded with freight. The wagon and the mules were covered with dust. Close behind was another string of mules and
another wagon. This was loaded with lumber, and the arriero driving the mules leaned back and put on the thick
wooden brakes as we passed. Up here the country was quite barren and the hills were rocky and hard-baked clay
furrowed by the rain.
We came around a curve into a town, and on both sides opened out a sudden green valley. A stream went
through the centre of the town and fields of grapes touched the houses.
The bus stopped in front of a posada and many of the passengers got down, and a lot of the baggage was
unstrapped from the roof from under the big tarpaulins and lifted down. Bill and I got down and went into the
posada. There was a low, dark room with saddles and harness, and hay-forks made of white wood, and clusters of
canvas rope-soled shoes and hams and slabs of bacon and white garlics and long sausages hanging from the roof. It
was cool and dusky, and we stood in front of a long wooden counter with two women behind it serving drinks.
Behind them were shelves stacked with supplies and goods.
We each had an aguardiente and paid forty centimes for the two drinks. I gave the woman fifty centimes to
make a tip, and she gave me back the copper piece, thinking I had misunderstood the price.
Two of our Basques came in and insisted on buying a drink. So they bought a drink and then we bought a
drink, and then they slapped us on the back and bought another drink. Then we bought, and then we all went out
into the sunlight and the heat, and climbed back on top of the bus. There was plenty of room now for every one to
sit on the seat, and the Basque who had been lying on the tin roof now sat between us. The woman who had been
serving drinks came out wiping her hands on her apron and talked to somebody inside the bus. Then the driver came
out swinging two flat leather mailpouches and climbed up, and everybody waving we started off.
The road left the green valley at once, and we were up in the hills again. Bill and the wine-bottle Basque were
having a conversation. A man leaned over from the other side of the seat and asked in English: "You're Americans?"
"Sure."
"I been there," he said. "Forty years ago."
He was an old man, as brown as the others, with the stubble of a white beard.
"How was it?"
"What you say?"
"How was America?"
"Oh, I was in California. It was fine."
"Why did you leave?"
"What you say?"
"Why did you come back here?"
"Oh! I come back to get married. I was going to go back but my wife she don't like to travel. Where you
from?"
"Kansas City."
"I been there," he said. "I been in Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Denver, Los Angeles, Salt Lake City."
He named them carefully.
"How long were you over?"
"Fifteen years. Then I come back and got married."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Have a drink?"
"All right," he said. "You can't get this in America, eh?"
"There's plenty if you can pay for it."
"What you come over here for?"
"We're going to the fiesta at Pamplona."
"You like the bull-fights?"
"Sure. Don't you?"
"Yes," he said. "I guess I like them."
Then after a little:
"Where you go now?"
"Up to Burguete to fish."
"Well," he said, "I hope you catch something."
He shook hands and turned around to the back seat again. The other Basques had been impressed. He sat back
comfortably and smiled at me when I turned around to look at the country. But the effort of talking American
seemed to have tired him. He did not say anything after that.
The bus climbed steadily up the road. The country was barren and rocks stuck up through the clay. There was
no grass beside the road. Looking back we could see the country spread out below. Far back the fields were squares
of green and brown on the hillsides. Making the horizon were the brown mountains. They were strangely shaped. As
we climbed higher the horizon kept changing. As the bus ground slowly up the road we could see other mountains
coming up in the south. Then the road came over the crest, flattened out, and went into a forest. It was a forest of
cork oaks, and the sun came through the trees in patches, and there were cattle grazing back in the trees. We went
through the forest and the road came out and turned along a rise of land, and out ahead of us was a rolling green
plain, with dark mountains beyond it. These were not like the brown, heat-baked mountains we had left behind.
These were wooded and there were clouds coming down from them. The green plain stretched off. It was cut by
fences and the white of the road showed through the trunks of a double line of trees that crossed the plain toward the
north. As we came to the edge of the rise we saw the red roofs and white houses of Burguete ahead strung out on the
plain, and away off on the shoulder of the first dark mountain was the gray metal-sheathed roof of the monastery of
Roncesvalles.
"There's Roncevaux," I said.
"Where?"
"Way off there where the mountain starts."
"It's cold up here," Bill said.
"It's high," I said. "It must be twelve hundred metres."
"It's awful cold," Bill said.
The bus levelled down onto the straight line of road that ran to Burguete. We passed a crossroads and crossed
a bridge over a stream. The houses of Burguete were along both sides of the road. There were no side-streets. We
passed the church and the schoolyard, and the bus stopped. We got down and the driver handed down our bags and
the rod-case. A carabineer in his cocked hat and yellow leather cross-straps came up.
"What's in there?" he pointed to the rod-case.
I opened it and showed him. He asked to see our fishing permits and I got them out. He looked at the date and
then waved us on.
"Is that all right?" I asked.
"Yes. Of course."
We went up the street, past the whitewashed stone houses, families sitting in their doorways watching us, to
http://www.en8848.com.cnthe inn.
The fat woman who ran the inn came out from the kitchen and shook hands with us. She took off her
spectacles, wiped them, and put them on again. It was cold in the inn and the wind was starting to blow outside. The
woman sent a girl up-stairs with us to show the room. There were two beds, a washstand, a clothes-chest, and a big,
framed steel-engraving of Nuestra Señora de Roncesvalles. The wind was blowing against the shutters. The room
was on the north side of the inn. We washed, put on sweaters, and came down-stairs into the dining-room. It had a
stone floor, low ceiling, and was oakpanelled. The shutters were all up and it was so cold you could see your breath.
"My God!" said Bill. "It can't be this cold to-morrow. I'm not going to wade a stream in this weather."
There was an upright piano in the far corner of the room beyond the wooden tables and Bill went over and
started to play.
"I got to keep warm," he said.
I went out to find the woman and ask her how much the room and board was. She put her hands under her
apron and looked away from me.
"Twelve pesetas."
"Why, we only paid that in Pamplona."
She did not say anything, just took off her glasses and wiped them on her apron.
"That's too much," I said. "We didn't pay more than that at a big hotel."
"We've put in a bathroom."
"Haven't you got anything cheaper?"
"Not in the summer. Now is the big season."
We were the only people in the inn. Well, I thought, it's only a few days.
"Is the wine included?"
"Oh, yes."
"Well," I said. "It's all right."
I went back to Bill. He blew his breath at me to show how cold it was, and went on playing. I sat at one of the
tables and looked at the pictures on the wall. There was one panel of rabbits, dead, one of pheasants, also dead, and
one panel of dead ducks. The panels were all dark and smoky-looking. There was a cupboard full of liqueur bottles.
I looked at them all. Bill was still playing. "How about a hot rum punch?" he said. "This isn't going to keep me
warm permanently."
I went out and told the woman what a rum punch was and how to make it. In a few minutes a girl brought a
stone pitcher, steaming, into the room. Bill came over from the piano and we drank the hot punch and listened to the
wind.
"There isn't too much rum in that."
I went over to the cupboard and brought the rum bottle and poured a half-tumblerful into the pitcher.
"Direct action," said Bill. "It beats legislation."
The girl came in and laid the table for supper.
"It blows like hell up here," Bill said.
The girl brought in a big bowl of hot vegetable soup and the wine. We had fried trout afterward and some sort
of a stew and a big bowl full of wild strawberries. We did not lose money on the wine, and the girl was shy but nice
about bringing it. The old woman looked in once and counted the empty bottles.
After supper we went up-stairs and smoked and read in bed to keep warm. Once in the night I woke and heard
the wind blowing. It felt good to be warm and in bed.
http://www.en8848.com.cn12
When I woke in the morning I went to the window and looked out. It had cleared and there were no clouds on
the mountains. Outside under the window were some carts and an old diligence, the wood of the roof cracked and
split by the weather. It must have been left from the days before the motor-buses. A goat hopped up on one of the
carts and then to the roof of the diligence. He jerked his head at the other goats below and when I waved at him he
bounded down.
Bill was still sleeping, so I dressed, put on my shoes outside in the hall, and went down-stairs. No one was
stirring down-stairs, so I unbolted the door and went out. It was cool outside in the early morning and the sun had
not yet dried the dew that had come when the wind died down. I hunted around in the shed behind the inn and found
a sort of mattock, and went down toward the stream to try and dig some worms for bait. The stream was clear and
shallow but it did not look trouty. On the grassy bank where it was damp I drove the mattock into the earth and
loosened a chunk of sod. There were worms underneath. They slid out of sight as I lifted the sod and I dug carefully
and got a good many. Digging at the edge of the damp ground I filled two empty tobacco-tins with worms and sifted
dirt onto them. The goats watched me dig.
When I went back into the inn the woman was down in the kitchen, and I asked her to get coffee for us, and
that we wanted a lunch. Bill was awake and sitting on the edge of the bed.
"I saw you out of the window," he said. "Didn't want to interrupt you. What were you doing? Burying your
money?"
"You lazy bum!"
"Been working for the common good? Splendid. I want you to do that every morning."
"Come on," I said. "Get up."
"What? Get up? I never get up."
He climbed into bed and pulled the sheet up to his chin.
"Try and argue me into getting up."
I went on looking for the tackle and putting it all together in the tackle-bag.
"Aren't you interested?" Bill asked.
"I'm going down and eat."
"Eat? Why didn't you say eat? I thought you just wanted me to get up for fun. Eat? Fine. Now you're
reasonable. You go out and dig some more worms and I'll be right down."
"Oh, go to hell!"
"Work for the good of all." Bill stepped into his underclothes. "Show irony and pity."
I started out of the room with the tackle-bag, the nets, and the rod-case.
"Hey! come back!"
I put my head in the door.
"Aren't you going to show a little irony and pity?"
I thumbed my nose.
"That's not irony."
As I went down-stairs I heard Bill singing, "Irony and Pity. When you're feeling. . . Oh, Give them Irony and
Give them Pity. Oh, give them Irony. When they're feeling. . . Just a little irony. Just a little pity.. ." He kept on
singing until he came down-stairs. The tune was: "The Bells are Ringing for Me and my Gal." I was reading a
week-old Spanish paper.
"What's all this irony and pity?"
"What? Don't you know about Irony and Pity?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"No. Who got it up?"
"Everybody. They're mad about it in New York. It's just like the Fratellinis used to be."
The girl came in with the coffee and buttered toast. Or, rather, it was bread toasted and buttered.
"Ask her if she's got any jam," Bill said. "Be ironical with her."
"Have you got any jam?"
"That's not ironical. I wish I could talk Spanish."
The coffee was good and we drank it out of big bowls. The girl brought in a glass dish of raspberry jam.
"Thank you."
"Hey! that's not the way," Bill said. "Say something ironical. Make some crack about Primo de Rivera."
"I could ask her what kind of a jam they think they've gotten into in the Riff."
"Poor," said Bill. "Very poor. You can't do it. That's all. You don't understand irony. You have no pity. Say
something pitiful."
"Robert Cohn."
"Not so bad. That's better. Now why is Cohn pitiful? Be ironic."
He took a big gulp of coffee.
"Aw, hell!" I said. "It's too early in the morning."
"There you go. And you claim you want to be a writei too. You're only a newspaper man. An expatriated
newspaper man. You ought to be ironical the minute you get out of bed. You ought to wake up with your mouth full
of pity."
"Go on," I said. "Who did you get this stuff from?"
"Everybody. Don't you read? Don't you ever see anybody? You know what you are? You're an expatriate. Why
don't you live in New York? Then you'd know these things. What do you want me to do? Come over here and tell
you every year?"
"Take some more coffee," I said.
"Good. Coffee is good for you. It's the caffeine in it. Caffeine, we are here. Caffeine puts a man on her horse
and a woman in his grave. You know what's the trouble with you? You're an expatriate. One of the worst type.
Haven't you heard that? Nobody that ever left their own country ever wrote anything worth printing. Not even in the
newspapers."
He drank the coffee.
"You're an expatriate. You've lost touch with the soil. You get precious. Fake European standards have ruined
you. You drink yourself to death. You become obsessed by sex. You spend all your time talking, not working. You
are an expatriate, see? You hang around cafés."
"It sounds like a swell life," I said. "When do I work?"
"You don't work. One group claims women support you. Another group claims you're impotent."
"No," I said. "I just had an accident."
"Never mention that," Bill said. "That's the sort of thing that can't be spoken of. That's what you ought to work
up into a mystery. Like Henry's bicycle."
He had been going splendidly, but he stopped. I was afraid he thought he had hurt me with that crack about
being impotent. I wanted to start him again.
"It wasn't a bicycle," I said. "He was riding horseback."
"I heard it was a tricycle."
"Well," I said. "A plane is sort of like a tricycle. The joystick works the same way."
"But you don't pedal it."
"No," I said, "I guess you don't pedal it."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Let's lay off that," Bill said.
"All right. I was just standing up for the tricycle."
"I think he's a good writer, too," Bill said. "And you're a hell of a good guy. Anybody ever tell you were a
good guy?"
"I'm not a good guy."
"Listen. You're a hell of a good guy, and I'm fonder of you than anybody on earth. I couldn't tell you that in
New York. It'd mean I was a faggot. That was what the Civil War was about. Abraham Lincoln was a faggot. He was
in love with General Grant. So was Jefferson Davis. Lincoln just freed the slaves on a bet. The Dred Scott case was
framed by the Anti-Saloon League. Sex explains it all. The Colonel's Lady and Judy O'Grady are Lesbians under
their skin."
He stopped.
"Want to hear some more?"
"Shoot," I said.
"I don't know any more. Tell you some more at lunch."
"Old Bill," I said.
"You bum!"
We packed the lunch and two bottles of wine in the rucksack, and Bill put it on. I carried the rod-case and the
landing-nets slung over my back. We started up the road and then went across a meadow and found a path that
crossed the fields and went toward the woods on the slope of the first hill. We walked across the fields on the sandy
path. The fields were rolling and grassy and the grass was short from the sheep grazing. The cattle were up in the
hills. We heard their bells in the woods.
The path crossed a stream on a foot-log. The log was surfaced off, and there was a sapling bent across for a
rail. In the flat pool beside the stream tadpoles spotted the sand. We went up a steep bank and across the rolling
fields. Looking back we saw Burguete, white houses and red roofs, and the white road with a truck going along it
and the dust rising.
Beyond the fields we crossed another faster-flowing stream. A sandy road led down to the ford and beyond
into the woods. The path crossed the stream on another foot-log below the ford, and joined the road, and we went
into the woods.
It was a beech wood and the trees were very old. Their roots bulked above the ground and the branches were
twisted. We walked on the road between the thick trunks of the old beeches and the sunlight came through the
leaves in light patches on the grass. The trees were big, and the foliage was thick but it was not gloomy. There was
no undergrowth, only the smooth grass, very green and fresh, and the big gray trees well spaced as though it were a
park.
"This is country," Bill said.
The road went up a hill and we got into thick woods, and the road kept on climbing. Sometimes it dipped
down but rose again steeply. All the time we heard the cattle in the woods. Finally, the road came out on the top of
the hills. We were on the top of the height of land that was the highest part of the range of wooded hills we had seen
from Burguete. There were wild strawberries growing on the sunny side of the ridge in a little clearing in the trees.
Ahead the road came out of the forest and went along the shoulder of the ridge of hills. The hills ahead were
not wooded, and there were great fields of yellow gorse. Way off we saw the steep bluffs, dark with trees and jutting
with gray stone, that marked the course of the Irati River.
"We have to follow this road along the ridge, cross these hills, go through the woods on the far hills, and come
down to the Irati valley," I pointed out to Bill.
"That's a hell of a hike."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"It's too far to go and fish and come back the same day, comfortably."
"Comfortably. That's a nice word. We'll have to go like hell to get there and back and have any fishing at all."
It was a long walk and the country was very fine, but we were tired when we came down the steep road that
led out of the wooded hills into the valley of the Rio de la Fabrica.
The road came out from the shadow of the woods into the hot sun. Ahead was a river-valley. Beyond the river
was a steep hill. There was a field of buckwheat on the hill. We saw a white house under some trees on the hillside.
It was very hot and we stopped under some trees beside a dam that crossed the river.
Bill put the pack against one of the trees and we jointed up the rods, put on the reels, tied on leaders, and got
ready to fish.
"You're sure this thing has trout in it?" Bill asked.
"It's full of them."
"I'm going to fish a fly. You got any McGintys?"
"There's some in there."
"You going to fish bait?"
"Yeah. I'm going to fish the dam here."
"Well, I'll take the fly-book, then." He tied on a fly. "Where'd I better go? Up or down?"
"Down is the best. They're plenty up above, too."
Bill went down the bank.
"Take a worm can."
"No, I don't want one. If they won't take a fly I'll just flick it around."
Bill was down below watching the stream.
"Say," he called up against the noise of the dam. "How about putting the wine in that spring up the road?"
"All right," I shouted. Bill waved his hand and started down the stream. I found the two wine-bottles in the
pack, and carried them up the road to where the water of a spring flowed out of an iron pipe. There was a board over
the spring and I lifted it and, knocking the corks firmly into the bottles, lowered them down into the water. It was so
cold my hand and wrist felt numbed. I put back the slab of wood, and hoped nobody would find the wine.
I got my rod that was leaning against the tree, took the bait-can and landing-net, and walked out onto the dam.
It was built to provide a head of water for driving logs. The gate was up, and I sat on one of the squared timbers and
watched the smooth apron of water before the river tumbled into the falls. In the white water at the foot of the dam it
was deep. As I baited up, a trout shot up out of the white water into the falls and was carried down. Before I could
finish baiting, another trout jumped at the falls, making the same lovely arc and disappearing into the water that was
thundering down. I put on a good-sized sinker and dropped into the white water close to the edge of the timbers of
the dam.
I did not feel the first trout strike. When I started to pull up I felt that I had one and brought him, fighting and
bending the rod almost double, out of the boiling water at the foot of the falls, and swung him up and onto the dam.
He was a good trout, and I banged his head against the timber so that he quivered out straight, and then slipped him
into my bag.
While I had him on, several trout had jumped at the falls. As soon as I baited up and dropped in again I
hooked another and brought him in the same way. In a little while I had six. They were all about the same size. I laid
them out, side by side, all their heads pointing the same way, and looked at them. They were beautifully colored and
firm and hard from the cold water. It was a hot day, so I slit them all and shucked out the insides, gills and all, and
tossed them over across the river. I took the trout ashore, washed them in the cold, smoothly heavy water above the
dam, and then picked some ferns and packed them all in the bag, three trout on a layer of ferns, then another layer of
ferns, then three more trout, and then covered them with ferns. They looked nice in the ferns, and now the bag was
http://www.en8848.com.cnbulky, and I put it in the shade of the tree.
It was very hot on the dam, so I put my worm-can in the shade with the bag, and got a book out of the pack
and settled down under the tree to read until Bill should come up for lunch.
It was a little past noon and there was not much shade, but I sat against the trunk of two of the trees that grew
together, and read. The book was something by A. E. W. Mason, and I was reading a wonderful story about a man
who had been frozen in the Alps and then fallen into a glacier and disappeared, and his bride was going to wait
twenty-four years exactly for his body to come out on the moraine, while her true love waited too, and they were
still waiting when Bill came up.
"Get any?" he asked. He had his rod and his bag and his net all in one hand, and he was sweating. I hadn't
heard him come up, because of the noise from the dam.
"Six. What did you get?"
Bill sat down, opened up his bag, laid a big trout on the grass. He took out three more, each one a little bigger
than the last, and laid them side by side in the shade from the tree. His face was sweaty and happy.
"How are yours?"
"Smaller."
"Let's see them."
"They're packed."
"How big are they really?"
"They're all about the size of your smallest."
"You're not holding out on me?"
"I wish I were."
"Get them all on worms?"
"Yes."
"You lazy bum!"
Bill put the trout in the bag and started for the river, swinging the open bag. He was wet from the waist down
and I knew he must have been wading the stream.
I walked up the road and got out the two bottles of wine. They were cold. Moisture beaded on the bottles as I
walked back to the trees. I spread the lunch on a newspaper, and uncorked one of the bottles and leaned the other
against a tree. Bill came up drying his hands, his bag plump with ferns.
"Let's see that bottle," he said. He pulled the cork, and tipped up the bottle and drank. "Whew! That makes my
eyes ache."
"Let's try it."
The wine was icy cold and tasted faintly rusty.
"That's not such filthy wine," Bill said.
"The cold helps it," I said.
We unwrapped the little parcels of lunch.
"Chicken."
"There's hard-boiled eggs."
"Find any salt?"
"First the egg," said Bill. "Then the chicken. Even Bryan could see that."
"He's dead. I read it in the paper yesterday."
"No. Not really?"
"Yes. Bryan's dead."
Bill laid down the egg he was peeling.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Gentlemen," he said, and unwrapped a drumstick from a piece of newspaper. "I reverse the order. For Bryan's
sake. As a tribute to the Great Commoner. First the chicken; then the egg."
"Wonder what day God created the chicken?"
"Oh," said Bill, sucking the drumstick, "how should we know? We should not question. Our stay on earth is
not for long. Let us rejoice and believe and give thanks."
"Eat an egg."
Bill gestured with the drumstick in one hand and the bottle of wine in the other.
"Let us rejoice in our blessings. Let us utilize the fowls of the air. Let us utilize the product of the vine. Will
you utilize a little, brother?"
"After you, brother."
Bill took a long drink.
"Utilize a little, brother," he handed me the bottle. "Let us not doubt, brother. Let us not pry into the holy
mysteries of the hencoop with simian fingers. Let us accept on faith and simply say--I want you to join with me in
saying--What shall we say, brother?" He pointed the drumstick at me and went on. "Let me tell you. We will say,
and I for one am proud to say--and I want you to say with me, on your knees, brother. Let no man be ashamed to
kneel here in the great out-of-doors. Remember the woods were God's first temples. Let us kneel and say: 'Don't eat
that, Lady--that's Mencken.'
"Here," I said. "Utilize a little of this."
We uncorked the other bottle.
"What's the matter?" I said. "Didn't you like Bryan?"
"I loved Bryan," said Bill. "We were like brothers."
"Where did you know him?"
"He and Mencken and I all went to Holy Cross together."
"And Frankie Fritsch."
"It's a lie. Frankie Fritsch went to Fordham."
"Well," I said, "I went to Loyola with Bishop Manning."
"It's a lie," Bill said. "I went to Loyola with Bishop Manning myself."
"You're cock-eyed," I said.
"On wine?"
"Why not?"
"It's the humidity," Bill said. "They ought to take this damn humidity away."
"Have another shot."
"Is this all we've got?"
"Only the two bottles."
"Do you know what you are?" Bill looked at the bottle affectionately.
"No," I said.
"You're in the pay of the Anti-Saloon League."
"I went to Notre Dame with Wayne B. Wheeler."
"It's a lie," said Bill. "I went to Austin Business College with Wayne B. Wheeler. He was class president."
"Well," I said, "the saloon must go."
"You're right there, old classmate," Bill said. "The saloon must go, and I will take it with me."
"You're cock-eyed."
"On wine?"
"On wine."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Well, maybe I am."
"Want to take a nap?"
"All right."
We lay with our heads in the shade and looked up into the trees.
"You asleep?"
"No," Bill said. "I was thinking."
I shut my eyes. It felt good lying on the ground.
"Say," Bill said, "what about this Brett business?"
"What about it?"
"Were you ever in love with her?"
"Sure."
"For how long?"
"Off and on for a hell of a long time."
"Oh, hell!" Bill said. "I'm sorry, fella."
"It's all right," I said. "I don't give a damn any more."
"Really?"
"Really. Only I'd a hell of a lot rather not talk about it."
"You aren't sore I asked you?"
"Why the hell should I be?"
"I'm going to sleep," Bill said. He put a newspaper over his face.
"Listen, Jake," he said, "are you really a Catholic?"
"Technically."
"What does that mean?"
"I don't know."
"All right, I'll go to sleep now," he said. "Don't keep me awake by talking so much."
I went to sleep, too. When I woke up Bill was packing the rucksack. Jt was late in the afternoon and the
shadow from the trees was long and went out over the dam. I was stiff from sleeping on the ground.
"What did you do? Wake up?" Bill asked. "Why didn't you spend the night?" I stretched and rubbed my eyes.
"I had a lovely dream," Bill said. "I don't remember what it was about, but it was a lovely dream."
"I don't think I dreamt."
"You ought to dream," Bill said. "All our biggest business men have been dreamers. Look at Ford. Look at
President Coolidge. Look at Rockefeller. Look at Jo Davidson."
I disjointed my rod and Bill's and packed them in the rod-case. I put the reels in the tackle-bag. Bill had
packed the rucksack and we put one of the trout-bags in. I carried the other.
"Well," said Bill, "have we got everything?"
"The worms."
"Your worms. Put them in there."
He had the pack on his back and I put the worm-cans in one of the outside flap pockets.
"You got everything now?"
I looked around on the grass at the foot of the elm-trees.
"Yes."
We started up the road into the woods. It was a long walk home to Burguete, and it was dark when we came
down across the fields to the road, and along the road between the houses of the town, their windows lighted, to the
inn.
http://www.en8848.com.cnWe stayed five days at Burguete and had good fishing. The nights were cold and the days were hot, and there
was always a breeze even in the heat of the day. It was hot enough so that it felt good to wade in a cold stream, and
the sun dried you when you came out and sat on the bank. We found a stream with a pool deep enough to swim in.
In the evenings we played three-handed bridge with an Englishman named Harris, who had walked over from Saint
Jean Pied de Port and was stopping at the inn for the fishing. He was very pleasant and went with us twice to the
Irati River. There was no word from Robert Cohn nor from Brett and Mike.
http://www.en8848.com.cn13
One morning I went down to breakfast and the Englishman, Harris, was already at the table. He was reading
the paper through spectacles. He looked up and smiled.
"Good morning," he said. "Letter for you. I stopped at the post and they gave it me with mine."
The letter was at my place at the table, leaning against a coffeecup. Harris was reading the paper again. I
opened the letter. It had been forwarded from Pamplona. It was dated San Sebastian, Sunday:
_Dear Jake_,
_We got here Friday, Brett passed out on the train, so brought her here for 3 days rest with old friends of ours.
We go to Montoya Hotel Pamplona Tuesday, arriving at I don't know what hour. Will you send a note by the bus to
tell us what to do to rejoin you all on Wednesday. All our love and sorry to be late, but Brett was really done in and
will be quite all right by Tues. and is practically so now. I know her so well and try to look after her but it's not so
easy. Love to all the chaps_,
_Michael_.
"What day of the week is it?" I asked Harris.
"Wednesday, I think. Yes, quite. Wednesday. Wonderful how one loses track of the days up here in the
mountains."
"Yes. We've been here nearly a week."
"I hope you're not thinking of leaving?"
"Yes. We'll go in on the afternoon bus, I'm afraid."
"What a rotten business. I had hoped we'd all have another go at the Irati together."
"We have to go _into_ Pamplona. We're meeting people there."
"What rotten luck for me. We've had a jolly time here at Burguete."
"Come on in to Pamplona. We can play some bridge there, and there's going to be a damned fine fiesta."
"I'd like to. Awfully nice of you to ask me. I'd best stop on here, though. I've not much more time to fish."
"You want those big ones in the Irati."
"I say, I do, you know. They're enormous trout there."
"I'd like to try them once more."
"Do. Stop over another day. Be a good chap."
"We really have to get into town," I said.
"What a pity."
After breakfast Bill and I were sitting warming in the sun on a bench out in front of the inn and talking it over.
I saw a girl coming up the road from the centre of the town. She stopped in front of us and took a telegram out of
the leather wallet that hung against her skirt.
"Por ustedes?"
I looked at it. The address was: "Barnes, Burguete."
"Yes. It's for us."
She brought out a book for me to sign, and I gave her a couple of coppers. The telegram was in Spanish:
"Vengo Jueves Cohn."
I handed it to Bill.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"What does the word Cohn mean?" he asked.
"What a lousy telegram!" I said. "He could send ten words for the same price. 'I come Thursday'. That gives
you a lot of dope, doesn't it?"
"It gives you all the dope that's of interest to Cohn."
"We're going in, anyway," I said. "There's no use trying to move Brett and Mike out here and back before the
fiesta. Should we answer it?"
"We might as well," said Bill. "There's no need for us to be snooty."
We walked up to the post-office and asked for a telegraph blank.
"What will we say?" Bill asked.
" 'Arriving to-night.' That's enough."
We paid for the message and walked back to the inn. Harris was there and the three of us walked up to
Roncesvalles. We went through the monastery.
"It's remarkable place," Harris said, when we came out. "But you know I'm not much on those sort of places."
"Me either," Bill said.
"It's a remarkable place, though," Harris said. "I wouldn't not have seen it. I'd been intending coming up each
day."
"It isn't the same as fishing, though, is it?" Bill asked. He liked Harris.
"I say not."
We were standing in front of the old chapel of the monastery.
"Isn't that a pub across the way?" Harris asked. "Or do my eyes deceive me?"
"It has the look of a pub," Bill said.
"It looks to me like a pub," I said.
"I say," said Harris, "let's utilize it." He had taken up utilizing from Bill.
We had a bottle of wine apiece. Harris would not let us pay.
He talked Spanish quite well, and the innkeeper would not take our money.
"I say. You don't know what it's meant to me to have you chaps up here."
"We've had a grand time, Harris."
Harris was a little tight.
"I say. Really you don't know how much it means. I've not had much fun since the war."
"We'll fish together again, some time. Don't you forget it, Harris."
"We must. We _have_ had such a jolly good time."
"How about another bottle around?"
"Jolly good idea," said Harris.
"This is mine," said Bill. "Or we don't drink it."
"I wish you'd let me pay for it. It _does_ give me pleasure, you know."
"This is going to give me pleasure," Bill said.
The innkeeper brought in the fourth bottle. We had kept the same glasses. Harris lifted his glass.
"I say. You know this does utilize well."
Bill slapped him on the back.
"Good old Harris."
"I say. You know my name isn't really Harris. It's Wilson Harris. All one name. With a hyphen, you know."
"Good old Wilson-Harris," Bill said. "We call you Harris because we're so fond of you."
"I say, Barnes. You don't know what this all means to me."
"Come on and utilize another glass," I said.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Barnes. Really, Barnes, you can't know. That's all."
"Drink up, Harris."
We walked back down the road from Roncesvalles with Harris between us. We had lunch at the inn and Harris
went with us to the bus. He gave us his card, with his address in London and his club and his business address, and
as we got on the bus he handed us each an envelope. I opened mine and there were a dozen flies in it. Harris had
tied them himself. He tied all his own flies.
"I say, Harris--" I began.
"No, no!" he said. He was climbing down from the bus. "They're not first-rate flies at all. I only thought if you
fished them some time it might remind you of what a good time we had."
The bus started. Harris stood in front of the post-office. He waved. As we started along the road he turned and
walked back toward the inn.
"Say, wasn't that Harris nice?" Bill said.
"I think he really did have a good time."
"Harris? You bet he did."
"I wish he'd come into Pamplona."
"He wanted to fish."
"Yes. You couldn't tell how English would mix with each other, anyway."
"I suppose not."
We got into Pamplona late in the afternoon and the bus stopped in front of the Hotel Montoya. Out in the plaza
they were stringing electric-light wires to light the plaza for the fiesta. A few kids came up when the bus stopped,
and a customs officer for the town made all the people getting down from the bus open their bundles on the
sidewalk. We went into the hotel and on the stairs I met Montoya. He shook hands with us, smiling in his
embarrassed way.
"Your friends are here," he said.
"Mr. Campbell?"
"Yes. Mr. Cohn and Mr. Campbell and Lady Ashley."
He smiled as though there were something I would hear about.
"When did they get in?"
"Yesterday. I've saved you the rooms you had."
"That's fine. Did you give Mr. Campbell the room on the plaza?"
"Yes. All the rooms we looked at."
"Where are our friends now?"
"I think they went to the pelota."
"And how about the bulls?"
Montoya smiled. "To-night," he said. "To-night at seven o'clock they bring in the Villar bulls, and to-morrow
come the Miuras. Do you all go down?"
"Oh, yes. They've never seen a desencajonada."
Montoya put his hand on my shoulder.
"I'll see you there."
He smiled again. He always smiled as though bull-fighting were a very special secret between the two of us; a
rather shocking but really very deep secret that we knew about. He always smiled as though there were something
lewd about the secret to outsiders, but that it was something that we understood. It would not do to expose it to
people who would not understand.
"Your friend, is he aficionado, too?" Montoya smiled at Bill.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Yes. He came all the way from New York to see the San Fermines."
"Yes?" Montoya politely disbelieved. "But he's not aficionado like you."
He put his hand on my shoulder again embarrassedly.
"Yes," I said. "He's a real aficionado."
"But he's not aficionado like you are."
Aficion means passion. An aficionado is one who is passionate about the bull-fights. All the good bull-fighters
stayed at Montoya's hotel; that is, those with aficion stayed there. The commercial bullfighters stayed once, perhaps,
and then did not come back. The good ones came each year. In Montoya's room were their photographs. The
photographs were dedicated to Juanito Montoya or to his sister. The photographs of bull-fighters Montoya had really
believed in were framed. Photographs of bull-fighters who had been without aficion Montoya kept in a drawer of
his desk. They often had the most flattering inscriptions. But they did not mean anything. One day Montoya took
them all out and dropped them in the waste-basket. He did not want them around.
We often talked about bulls and bull-fighters. I had stopped at the Montoya for several years. We never talked
for very long at a time. It was simply the pleasure of discovering what we each felt. Men would come in from
distant towns and before they left Pamplona stop and talk for a few minutes with Montoya about bulls. These men
were aficionados. Those who were aficionados could always get rooms even when the hotel was full. Montoya
introduced me to some of them. They were always very polite at first, and it amused them very much that I should
be an American. Somehow it was taken for granted that an American could not have aficion. He might simulate it or
confuse it with excitement, but he could not really have it. When they saw that I had aficion, and there was no
password, no set questions that could bring it out, rather it was a sort of oral spiritual examination with the questions
always a little on the defensive and never apparent, there was this same embarrassed putting the hand on the
shoulder, or a "Buen hombre." But nearly always there was the actual touching. It seemed as though they wanted to
touch you to make it certain.
Montoya could forgive anything of a bull-fighter who had aficion. He could forgive attacks of nerves, panic,
bad unexplainable actions, all sorts of lapses. For one who had aficion he could forgive anything. At once he
forgave me all my friends. Without his ever saying anything they were simply a little something shameful between
us, like the spilling open of the horses in bull-fighting.
Bill had gone up-stairs as we came in, and I found him washing and changing in his room.
"Well," he said, "talk a lot of Spanish?"
"He was telling me about the bulls coming in tonight."
"Let's find the gang and go down."
"All right. They'll probably be at the café."
"Have you got tickets?"
"Yes. I got them for all the unloadings."
"What's it like?" He was pulling his cheek before the glass, looking to see if there were unshaved patches
under the line of the jaw.
"It's pretty good," I said. "They let the bulls out of the cages one at a time, and they have steers in the corral to
receive them and keep them from fighting, and the bulls tear in at the steers and the steers run around like old maids
trying to quiet them down."
"Do they ever gore the steers?"
"Sure. Sometimes they go right after them and kill them."
"Can't the steers do anything?"
"No. They're trying to make friends."
"What do they have them in for?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"To quiet down the bulls and keep them from breaking their horns against the stone walls, or goring each
other."
"Must be swell being a steer."
We went down the stairs and out of the door and walked across the square toward the café Iruña. There were
two lonely looking ticket-houses standing in the square. Their windows, marked SOL, SOL Y SOMBRA, and
SOMBRA, were shut. They would not open until the day before the fiesta.
Across the square the white wicker tables and chairs of the Iruña extended out beyond the Arcade to the edge
of the street. I looked for Brett and Mike at the tables. There they were. Brett and Mike and Robert Cohn. Brett was
wearing a Basque beret. So was Mike. Robert Cohn was bare-headed and wearing his spectacles. Brett saw us
coming and waved. Her eyes crinkled up as we came up to the table.
"Hello, you chaps!" she called.
Brett was happy. Mike had a way of getting an intensity of feeling into shaking hands. Robert Cohn shook
hands because we were back.
"Where the hell have you been?" I asked.
"I brought them up here," Cohn said.
"What rot," Brett said. "We'd have gotten here earlier if you hadn't come."
"You'd never have gotten here."
"What rot! You chaps are brown. Look at Bill."
"Did you get good fishing?" Mike asked. "We wanted to join you."
"It wasn't bad. We missed you."
"I wanted to come," Cohn said, "but I thought I ought to bring them."
"You bring us. What rot."
"Was it really good?" Mike asked. "Did you take many?"
"Some days we took a dozen apiece. There was an Englishman up there."
"Named Harris," Bill said. "Ever know him, Mike? He was in the war, too."
"Fortunate fellow," Mike said. "What times we had. How I wish those dear days were back."
"Don't be an ass."
"Were you in the war, Mike?" Cohn asked.
"Was I not."
"He was a very distinguished soldier," Brett said. "Tell them about the time your horse bolted down
Piccadilly."
"I'll not. I've told that four times."
"You never told me," Robert Cohn said.
"I'll not tell that story. It reflects discredit on me."
"Tell them about your medals."
"I'll not. That story reflects great discredit on me."
"What story's that?"
"Brett will tell you. She tells all the stories that reflect discredit on me."
"Go on. Tell it, Brett."
"Should I?"
"I'll tell it myself."
"What medals have you got, Mike?"
"I haven't got any medals."
"You must have some."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I suppose I've the usual medals. But I never sent in for them. One time there was this whopping big dinner
and the Prince of Wales was to be there, and the cards said medals will be worn. So naturally I had no medals, and I
stopped at my tailor's and he was impressed by the invitation, and I thought that's a good piece of business, and I
said to him: 'You've got to fix me up with some medals.' He said: 'What medals, sir?' And I said: 'Oh, any medals.
Just give me a few medals.' So he said: 'What medals _have_ you, sir?' And I said: 'How should I know?' Did he
think I spent all my time reading the bloody gazette? 'Just give me a good lot. Pick them out yourself.' So he got me
some medals, you know, miniature medals, and handed me the box, and I put it in my pocket and forgot it. Well, I
went to the dinner, and it was the night they'd shot Henry Wilson, so the Prince didn't come and the King didn't
come, and no one wore any medals, and all these coves were busy taking off their medals, and I had mine in my
pocket."
He stopped for us to laugh.
"Is that all?"
"That's all. Perhaps I didn't tell it right."
"You didn't," said Brett. "But no matter."
We were all laughing.
"Ah, yes," said Mike. "I know now. It was a damn dull dinner, and I couldn't stick it, so I left. Later on in the
evening I found the box in my pocket. What's this? I said. Medals? Bloody military medals? So I cut them all off
their backing--you know, they put them on a strip--and gave them all around. Gave one to each girl. Form of
souvenir. They thought I was hell's own shakes of a soldier. Give away medals in a night club. Dashing fellow."
"Tell the rest," Brett said.
"Don't you think that was funny?" Mike asked. We were all laughing. "It was. I swear it was. Any rate, my
tailor wrote me and wanted the medals back. Sent a man around. Kept on writing for months. Seems some chap had
left them to be cleaned. Frightfully military cove. Set hell's own store by them." Mike paused. "Rotten luck for the
tailor," he said.
"You don't mean it," Bill said. "I should think it would have been grand for the tailor."
"Frightfully good tailor. Never believe it to see me now," Mike said. "I used to pay him a hundred pounds a
year just to keep him quiet. So he wouldn't send me any bills. Frightful blow to him when I went bankrupt. It was
right after the medals. Gave his letters rather a bitter tone."
"How did you go bankrupt?" Bill asked.
"Two ways," Mike said. "Gradually and then suddenly."
"What brought it on?"
"Friends," said Mike. "I had a lot of friends. False friends. Then I had creditors, too. Probably had more
creditors than anybody in England."
"Tell them about in the court," Brett said.
"I don't remember," Mike said. "I was just a little tight."
"Tight!" Brett exclaimed. "You were blind!"
"Extraordinary thing," Mike said. "Met my former partner the other day. Offered to buy me a drink."
"Tell them about your learned counsel," Brett said.
"I will not," Mike said. "My learned counsel was blind, too. I say this is a gloomy subject. Are we going down
and see these bulls unloaded or not?"
"Let's go down."
We called the waiter, paid, and started to walk through the town. I started off walking with Brett, but Robert
Cohn came up and joined her on the other side. The three of us walked along, past the Ayuntamiento with the
banners hung from the balcony, down past the market and down past the steep street that led to the bridge across the
http://www.en8848.com.cnArga. There were many people walking to go and see the bulls, and carriages drove down the hill and across the
bridge, the drivers, the horses, and the whips rising above the walking people in the street. Across the bridge we
turned up a road to the corrals. We passed a wineshop with a sign in the window: Good Wine 30 Centimes A Liter.
"That's where we'll go when funds get low," Brett said.
The woman standing in the door of the wine-shop looked at us as we passed. She called to some one in the
house and three girls came to the window and stared. They were staring at Brett.
At the gate of the corrals two men took tickets from the people that went in. We went in through the gate.
There were trees inside and a iow, stone house. At the far end was the stone wall of the corrals, with apertures in the
stone that were like loop-holes running all along the face of each corral. A ladder led up to the top of the wall, and
people were climbing up the ladder and spreading down to stand on the walls that separated the two corrals. As we
came up the ladder, walking across the grass under the trees, we passed the big, gray painted cages with the bulls in
them. There was one bull in each travelling-box. They had come by train from a bull-breeding ranch in Castile, and
had been unloaded off flat-cars at the station and brought up here to be let out of their cages into the corrals. Each
cage was stencilled with the name and the brand of the bull-breeder.
We climbed up and found a place on the wall looking down into the corral. The stone walls were whitewashed,
and there was straw on the ground and wooden feed-boxes and water-troughs set against the wall.
"Look up there," I said.
Beyond the river rose the plateau of the town. All along the old walls and ramparts people were standing. The
three lines of fortifications made three black lines of people. Above the walls there were heads in the windows of
the houses. At the far end of the plateau boys had climbed into the trees.
"They must think something is going to happen," Brett said.
"They want to see the bulls."
Mike and Bill were on the other wall across the pit of the corral. They waved to us. People who had come late
were standing behind us, pressing against us when other people crowded them.
"Why don't they start?" Robert Cohn asked.
A single mule was hitched to one of the cages and dragged it up against the gate in the corral wall. The men
shoved and lifted it with crowbars into position against the gate. Men were standing on the wall ready to pull up the
gate of the corral and then the gate of the cage. At the other end of the corral a gate opened and two steers came in,
swaying their heads and trotting, their lean flanks swinging. They stood together at the far end, their heads toward
the gate where the bull would enter.
"They don't look happy," Brett said.
The men on top of the wall leaned back and pulled up the door of the corral. Then they pulled up the door of
the cage.
I leaned way over the wall and tried to see into the cage. It was dark. Some one rapped on the cage with an
iron bar. Inside something seemed to explode. The bull, striking into the wood from side to side with his horns,
made a great noise. Then I saw a dark muzzle and the shadow of horns, and then, with a clattering on the wood in
the hollow box, the bull charged and came out into the corral, skidding with his forefeet in the straw as he stopped,
his head up, the great hump of muscle on his neck swollen tight, his body muscles quivering as he looked up at the
crowd on the stone walls. The two steers backed away against the wall, their heads sunken, their eyes watching the
bull.
The bull saw them and charged. A man shouted from behind one of the boxes and slapped his hat against the
planks, and the bull, before he reached the steer, turned, gathered himself and charged where the man had been,
trying to reach him behind the planks with a half-dozen quick, searching drives with the right horn.
"My God, isn't he beautiful?" Brett said. We were looking right down on him.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Look how he knows how to use his horns," I said. "He's got a left and a right just like a boxer."
"Not really?"
"You watch."
"It goes too fast."
"Wait. There'll be another one in a minute."
They had backed up another cage into the entrance. In the far corner a man, from behind one of the plank
shelters, attracted the bull, and while the bull was facing away the gate was pulled up and a second bull came out
into the corral.
He charged straight for the steers and two men ran out from behind the planks and shouted, to turn him. He
did not change his direction and the men shouted: "Hah! Hah! Toro!" and waved their arms; the two steers turned
sideways to take the shock, and the bull drove into one of the steers.
"Don't look," I said to Brett. She was watching, fascinated.
"Fine," I said. "If it doesn't buck you."
"I saw it," she said. "I saw him shift from his left to his right horn."
"Damn good!"
The steer was down now, his neck stretched out, his head twisted, he lay the way he had fallen. Suddenly the
bull left off and made for the other steer which had been standing at the far end, his head swinging, watching it all.
The steer ran awkwardly and the bull caught him, hooked him lightly in the flank, and then turned away and looked
up at the crowd on the walls, his crest of muscle rising. The steer came up to him and made as though to nose at him
and the bull hooked perfunctorily. The next time he nosed at the steer and then the two of them trotted over to the
other bull.
When the next bull came out, all three, the two bulls and the steer, stood together, their heads side by side,
their horns against the newcomer. In a few minutes the steer picked the new bull up, quieted him down, and made
him one of the herd. When the last two bulls had been unloaded the herd were all together.
The steer who had been gored had gotten to his feet and stood against the stone wall. None of the bulls came
near him, and he did not attempt to join the herd.
We climbed down from the wall with the crowd, and had a last look at the bulls through the loopholes in the
wall of the corral. They were all quiet now, their heads down. We got a carriage outside and rode up to the café.
Mike and Bill came in half an hour later. They had stopped on the way for several drinks.
We were sitting in the café.
"That's an extraordinary business," Brett said.
"Will those last ones fight as well as the first?" Robert Cohn asked. "They seemed to quiet down awfully fast."
"They all know each other," I said. "They're only dangerous when they're alone, or only two or three of them
together."
"What do you mean, dangerous?" Bill said. "They all looked dangerous to me."
"They only want to kill when they're alone. Of course, if you went in there you'd probably detach one of them
from the herd, and he'd be dangerous."
"That's too complicated," Bill said. "Don't you ever detach me from the herd, Mike."
"I say," Mike said, "they were fine bulls, weren't they? Did you see their horns?"
"Did I not," said Brett. "I had no idea what they were like."
"Did you see the one hit that steer?" Mike asked. "That was extraordinary."
"It's no life being a steer," Robert Cohn said.
"Don't you think so?" Mike said. "I would have thought you'd loved being a steer, Robert."
"What do you mean, Mike?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"They lead such a quiet life. They never say anything and they're always hanging about so."
We were embarrassed. Bill laughed. Robert Cohn was angry. Mike went on talking.
"I should think you'd love it. You'd never have to say a word. Come on, Robert. Do say something. Don't just
sit there."
"I said something, Mike. Don't you remember? About the steers."
"Oh, say something more. Say something funny. Can't you see we're all having a good time here?"
"Come off it, Michael. You're drunk," Brett said.
"I'm not drunk. I'm quite serious. _Is_ Robert Cohn going to follow Brett around like a steer all the time?"
"Shut up, Michael. Try and show a little breeding."
"Breeding be damned. Who has any breeding, anyway, except the bulls? Aren't the bulls lovely? Don't you
like them, Bill? Why don't you say something, Robert? Don't sit there looking like a bloody funeral. What if Brett
did sleep with you? She's slept with lots of better people than you."
"Shut up," Cohn said. He stood up. "Shut up, Mike."
"Oh, don't stand up and act as though you were going to hit me. That won't make any difference to me. Tell me,
Robert. Why do you follow Brett around like a poor bloody steer? Don't you know you're not wanted? I know when
I'm not wanted. Why don't you know when you're not wanted? You came down to San Sebastian where you weren't
wanted, and followed Brett around like a bloody steer. Do you think that's right?"
"Shut up. You're drunk."
"Perhaps I am drunk. Why aren't you drunk? Why don't you ever get drunk, Robert? You know you didn't
have a good time at San Sebastian because none of our friends would invite you on any of the parties. You can't
blame them hardly. Can you? I asked them to. They wouldn't do it. You can't blame them, now. Can you? Now,
answer me. Can you blame them?"
"Go to hell, Mike."
"I can't blame them. Can you blame them? Why do you follow Brett around? Haven't you any manners? How
do you think it makes _me_ feel?"
"You're a splendid one to talk about manners," Brett said. "You've such lovely manners."
"Come on, Robert," Bill said.
"What do you follow her around for?"
Bill stood up and took hold of Cohn.
"Don't go," Mike said. "Robert Cohn's going to buy a drink."
Bill went off with Cohn. Cohn's face was sallow. Mike went on talking. I sat and listened for a while. Brett
looked disgusted.
"I say, Michael, you might not be such a bloody ass," she interrupted. "I'm not saying he's not right, you
know." She turned to me.
The emotion left Mike's voice. We were all friends together.
"I'm not so damn drunk as I sounded," he said.
"I know you're not," Brett said.
"We're none of us sober," I said.
"I didn't say anything I didn't mean."
"But you put it so badly," Brett laughed.
"He was an ass, though. He came down to San Sebastian where he damn well wasn't wanted. He hung around
Brett and just looked at her. It made me damned well sick."
"He did behave very badly," Brett said.
"Mark you. Brett's had affairs with men before. She tells me all about everything. She gave me this chap
http://www.en8848.com.cnCohn's letters to read. I wouldn't read them."
"Damned noble of you."
"No, listen, Jake. Brett's gone off with men. But they weren't ever Jews, and they didn't come and hang about
afterward."
"Damned good chaps," Brett said. "It's all rot to talk about it. Michael and I understand each other."
"She gave me Robert Cohn's letters. I wouldn't read them."
"You wouldn't read any letters, darling. You wouldn't read mine."
"I can't read letters," Mike said. "Funny, isn't it?"
"You can't read anything."
"No. You're wrong there. I read quite a bit. I read when I'm at home."
"You'll be writing next," Brett said. "Come on, Michael. Do buck up. You've got to go through with this thing
now. He's here. Don't spoil the fiesta."
"Well, let him behave, then."
"He'll behave. I'll tell him."
"You tell him, Jake. Tell him either he must behave or get out."
"Yes," I said, "it would be nice for me to tell him."
"Look, Brett. Tell Jake what Robert calls you. That _is_ perfect, you know."
"Oh, no. I can't."
"Go on. We're all friends. Aren't we all friends, Jake?"
"I can't tell him. It's too ridiculous."
"I'll tell him."
"You won't, Michael. Don't be an ass."
"He calls her Circe," Mike said. "He claims she turns men into swine. Damn good. I wish I were one of these
literary chaps."
"He'd be good, you know," Brett said. "He writes a good letter."
"I know," I said. "He wrote me from San Sebastian."
"That was nothing," Brett said. "He can write a damned amusing letter."
"She made me write that. She was supposed to be ill."
"I damned well was, too."
"Come on," I said, "we must go in and eat."
"How should I meet Cohn?" Mike said.
"Just act as though nothing had happened."
"It's quite all right with me," Mike said. "I'm not embarrassed."
"If he says anything, just say you were tight."
"Quite. And the funny thing is I think I was tight."
"Come on," Brett said. "Are these poisonous things paid for? I must bathe before dinner."
We walked across the square. It was dark and all around the square were the lights from the cafés under the
arcades. We walked across the gravel under the trees to the hotel.
They went up-stairs and I stopped to speak with Montoya.
"Well, how did you like the bulls?" he asked.
"Good. They were nice bulls."
"They're all right"--Montoya shook his head--"but they're not too good."
"What didn't you like about them?"
"I don't know. They just didn't give me the feeling that they were so good."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I know what you mean."
"They're all right."
"Yes. They're all right."
"How did your friends like them?"
"Fine."
"Good," Montoya said.
I went up-stairs. Bill was in his room standing on the balcony looking out at the square. I stood beside him.
"Where's Cohn?"
"Up-stairs in his room."
"How does he feel?"
"Like hell, naturally. Mike was awful. He's terrible when he's tight."
"He wasn't so tight."
"The hell he wasn't. I know what we had before we came to the café."
"He sobered up afterward."
"Good. He was terrible. I don't like Cohn, God knows, and I think it was a silly trick for him to go down to
San Sebastian, but nobody has any business to talk like Mike."
"How'd you like the bulls?"
"Grand. It's grand the way they bring them out."
"To-morrow come the Miuras."
"When does the fiesta start?"
"Day after to-morrow."
"We've got to keep Mike from getting so tight. That kind of stuff is terrible."
"We'd better get cleaned up for supper."
"Yes. That will be a pleasant meal."
"Won't it?"
As a matter of fact, supper was a pleasant meal. Brett wore a black, sleeveless evening dress. She looked quite
beautiful. Mike acted as though nothing had happened. I had to go up and bring Robert Cohn down. He was
reserved and formal, and his face was still taut and sallow, but he cheered up finally. He could not stop looking at
Brett. It seemed to make him happy. It must have been pleasant for him to see her looking so lovely, and know he
had been away with her and that every one knew it. They could not take that away from him. Bill was very funny.
So was Michael. They were good together.
It was like certain dinners I remember from the war. There was much wine, an ignored tension, and a feeling
of things coming that you could not prevent happening. Under the wine I lost the disgusted feeling and was happy. It
seemed they were all such nice people.
http://www.en8848.com.cn14
I do not know what time I got to bed. I remember undressing, putting on a bathrobe, and standing out on the
balcony. I knew I was quite drunk, and when I came in I put on the light over the head of the bed and started to read.
I was reading a book by Turgenieff. Probably I read the same two pages over several times. It was one of the stories
in "A Sportsman's Sketches." I had read it before, but it seemed quite new. The country became very clear and the
feeling of pressure in my head seemed to loosen. I was very drunk and I did not want to shut my eyes because the
room would go round and round. If I kept on reading that feeling would pass.
I heard Brett and Robert Cohn come up the stairs. Cohn said good night outside the door and went on up to his
room. I heard Brett go into the room next door. Mike was already in bed. He had come in with me an hour before.
He woke as she came in, and they talked together. I heard them laugh. I turned off the light and tried to go to sleep.
It was not necessary to read any more. I could shut my eyes without getting the wheeling sensation. But I could not
sleep. There is no reason why because it is dark you should look at things differently from when it is light. The hell
there isn't!
I figured that all out once, and for six months I never slept with the electric light off. That was another bright
idea. To hell with women, anyway. To hell with you, Brett Ashley.
Women made such swell friends. Awfully swell. In the first place, you had to be in love with a woman to have
a basis of friendship. I had been having Brett for a friend. I had not been thinking about her side of it. I had been
getting something for nothing. That only delayed the presentation of the bill. The bill always came. That was one of
the swell things you could count on.
I thought I had paid for everything. Not like the woman pays and pays and pays. No idea of retribution or
punishment. Just exchange of values. You gave up something and got something else. Or you worked for something.
You paid some way for everything that was any good. I paid my way into enough things that I liked, so that I had a
good time. Either you paid by learning about them, or by experience, or by taking chances, or by money. Enjoying
living was learning to get your money's worth and knowing when you had it. You could get your money's worth.
The world was a good place to buy in. It seemed like a fine philosophy. In five years, I thought, it will seem just as
silly as all the other fine philosophies I've had.
Perhaps that wasn't true, though. Perhaps as you went along you did learn something. I did not care what it
was all about. All I wanted to know was how to live in it. Maybe if you found out how to live in it you learned from
that what it was all about.
I wished Mike would not behave so terribly to Cohn, though. Mike was a bad drunk. Brett was a good drunk.
Bill was a good drunk. Cohn was never drunk. Mike was unpleasant after he passed a certain point. I liked to see
him hurt Cohn. I wished he would not do it, though, because afterward it made me disgusted at myself. That was
morality; things that made you disgusted afterward. No, that must be immorality. That was a large statement. What a
lot of bilge I could think up at night. What rot, I could hear Brett say it. What rot! When you were with the English
you got into the habit of using English expressions in your thinking. The English spoken language--the upper
classes, anyway--must have fewer words than the Eskimo. Of course I didn't know anything about the Eskimo.
Maybe the Eskimo was a fine language. Say the Cherokee. I didn't know anything about the Cherokee, either. The
English talked with inflected phrases. One phrase to mean everything. I liked them, though. I liked the way they
talked. Take Harris. Still Harris was not the upper classes.
I turned on the light again and read. I read the Turgenieff. I knew that now, reading it in the oversensitized
state of my mind after much too much brandy, I would remember it somewhere, and afterward it would seem as
though it had really happened to me. I would always have it. That was another good thing you paid for and then had.
Some time along toward daylight I went to sleep.
http://www.en8848.com.cnThe next two days in Pamplona were quiet, and there were no more rows. The town was getting ready for the
fiesta. Workmen put up the gate-posts that were to shut off the side streets when the bulls were released from the
corrals and came running through the streets in the morning on their way to the ring. The workmen dug holes and
fitted in the timbers, each timber numbered for its regular place. Out on the plateau beyond the town employees of
the bull-ring exercised picador horses, galloping them stiff-legged on the hard, sun-baked fields behind the bull-ring.
The big gate of the bull-ring was open, and inside the amphitheatre was being swept. The ring was rolled and
sprinkled, and carpenters replaced weakened or cracked planks in the barrera. Standing at the edge of the smooth
rolled sand you could look up in the empty stands and see old women sweeping out the boxes.
Outside, the fence that led from the last Street of the town to the entrance of the bull-ring was already in place
and made a long pen; the crowd would come running down with the bulls behind them on the morning of the day of
the first bull-fight. Out across the plain, where the horse and cattle fair would be, some gypsies had camped under
the trees. The wine and aguardiente sellers were putting up their booths. One booth advertised ANIS DEL TORO.
The cloth sign hung against the planks in the hot sun. In the big square that was the centre of the town there was no
change yet. We sat in the white wicker chairs on the terrasse of the café and watched the motorbuses come in and
unload peasants from the country coming in to the market, and we watched the buses fill up and start out with
peasants sitting with their saddle-bags full of the things they had bought in the town. The tall gray motor-buses were
the only life of the square except for the pigeons and the man with a hose who sprinkled the gravelled square and
watered the streets.
In the evening was the paseo. For an hour after dinner every one, all the good-looking girls, the officers from
the garrison, all the fashionable people of the town, walked in the street on one side of the square while the café
tables filled with the regular after-dinner crowd.
During the morning I usually sat in the café and read the Madrid papers and then walked in the town or out
into the country. Sometimes Bill went along. Sometimes he wrote in his room. Robert Cohn spent the mornings
studying Spanish or trying to get a shave at the barber-shop. Brett and Mike never got up until noon. We all had a
vermouth at the café. It was a quiet life and no one was drunk. I went to church a couple of times, once with Brett.
She said she wanted to hear me go to confession, but I told her that not only was it impossible but it was not as
interesting as it sounded, and, besides, it would be in a language she did not know. We met Cohn as we came out of
church, and although it was obvious he had followed us, yet he was very pleasant and nice, and we all three went for
a walk out to the gypsy camp, and Brett had her fortune told.
It was a good morning, there were high white clouds above the mountains. It had rained a little in the night
and it was fresh and cool on the plateau, and there was a wonderful view. We all felt good and we felt healthy, and I
felt quite friendly to Cohn. You could not be upset about anything on a day like that.
That was the last day before the fiesta.
http://www.en8848.com.cn15
At noon of Sunday, the 6th of July, the fiesta exploded. There is no other way to describe it. People had been
coming in all day from the country, but they were assimilated in the town and you did not notice them. The square
was as quiet in the hot sun as on any other day. The peasants were in the outlying wine-shops. There they were
drinking, getting ready for the fiesta. They had come in so recently from the plains and the hills that it was necessary
that they make their shifting in values gradually. They could not start in paying café prices. They got their money's
worth in the wine-shops. Money still had a definite value in hours worked and bushels of grain sold. Late in the
fiesta it would not matter what they paid, nor where they bought.
Now on the day of the starting of the fiesta of San Fermin they had been in the wine-shops of the narrow
streets of the town since early morning. Going down the streets in the morning on the way to mass in the cathedral, I
heard them singing through the open doors of the shops. They were warming up. There were many people at the
eleven o'clock mass. San Fermin is also a religious festival.
I walked down the hill from the cathedral and up the street to the café on the square. It was a little before noon.
Robert Cohn and Bill were sitting at one of the tables. The marble-topped tables and the white wicker chairs were
gone. They were replaced by cast-iron tables and severe folding chairs. The café was like a battleship stripped for
action. Today the waiters did not leave you alone all morning to read without asking if you wanted to order
something. A waiter came up as soon as I sat down.
"What are you drinking?" I asked Bill and Robert.
"Sherry," Cohn said.
"Jerez," I said to the waiter.
Before the waiter brought the sherry the rocket that announced the fiesta went up in the square. It burst and
there was a gray ball of smoke high up above the Theatre Gayarre, across on the other side of the plaza. The ball of
smoke hung in the sky like a shrapnel burst, and as I watched, another rocket came up to it, trickling smoke in the
bright sunlight. I saw the bright flash as it burst and another little cloud of smoke appeared. By the time the second
rocket had burst there were so many people in the arcade, that had been empty a minute before, that the waiter,
holding the bottle high up over his head, could hardly get through the crowd to our table. People were coming into
the square from all sides, and down the street we heard the pipes and the fifes and the drums coming. They were
playing the _riau-riau_ music, the pipes shrill and the drums pounding, and behind them came the men and boys
dancing. When the fifers stopped they all crouched down in the street, and when the reedpipes and the fifes shrilled,
and the flat, dry, hollow drums tapped it out again, they all went up in the air dancing. In the crowd you saw only
the heads and shoulders of the dancers going up and down.
In the square a man, bent over, was playing on a reed-pipe, and a crowd of children were following him
shouting, and pulling at his clothes. He came out of the square, the children following him, and piped them past the
café and down a side street. We saw his blank pockmarked face as he went by, piping, the children close behind him
shouting and pulling at him.
"He must be the village idiot," Bill said. "My God! look at that!"
Down the street came dancers. The street was solid with dancers, all men. They were all dancing in time
behind their own fifers and drummers. They were a club of some sort, and all wore workmen's blue smocks, and red
handkerchiefs around their necks, and carried a great banner on two poles. The banner danced up and down with
them as they came down surrounded by the crowd.
"Hurray for Wine! Hurray for the Foreigners!" was painted on the banner.
"Where are the foreigners?" Robert Cohn asked.
"We're the foreigners," Bill said.
http://www.en8848.com.cnAll the time rockets were going up. The café tables were all full now. The square was emptying of people and
the crowd was filling the cafés.
"Where's Brett and Mike?" Bill asked.
"I'll go and get them," Cohn said.
"Bring them here."
The fiesta was really started. It kept up day and night for seven days. The dancing kept up, the drinking kept
up, the noise went on. The things that happened could only have happened during a fiesta. Everything became quite
unreal finally and it seemed as though nothing could have any consequences. It seemed out of place to think of
consequences during the fiesta. All during the fiesta you had the feeling, even when it was quiet, that you had to
shout any remark to make it heard. It was the same feeling about any action. It was a fiesta and it went on for seven
days.
That afternoon was the big religious procession. San Fermin was translated from one church to another. In the
procession were all the dignitaries, civil and religious. We could not see them because the crowd was too great.
Ahead of the formal procession and behind it danced the _riau-riau_ dancers. There was one mass of yellow shirts
dancing up and down in the crowd. All we could see of the procession through the closely pressed people that
crowded all the side streets and curbs were the great giants, cigar-store Indians, thirty feet high, Moors, a King and
Queen, whirling and waltzing solemnly to the _riau-riau_.
They were all standing outside the chapel where San Fermin and the dignitaries had passed in, leaving a guard
of soldiers, the giants, with the men who danced in them standing beside their resting frames, and the dwarfs
moving with their whacking bladders through the crowd. We started inside and there was a smell of incense and
people filing back into the church, but Brett was stopped just inside the door because she had no hat, so we went out
again and along the street that ran back from the chapel into town. The street was lined on both sides with people
keeping their place at the curb for the return of the procession. Some dancers formed a circle around Brett and
started to dance. They wore big wreaths of white garlics around their necks. They took Bill and me by the arms and
put us in the circle. Bill started to dance, too. They were all chanting. Brett wanted to dance but they did not want
her to. They wanted her as an image to dance around. When the song ended with the sharp _riau-riau!_ they rushed
us into a wine-shop.
We stood at the counter. They had Brett seated on a wine-cask. It was dark in the wine-shop and full of men
singing, hard-voiced singing. Back of the counter they drew the wine from casks. I put down money for the wine,
but one of the men picked it up and put it back in my pocket.
"I want a leather wine-bottle," Bill said.
"There's a place down the street," I said. "I'll go get a couple."
The dancers did not want me to go out. Three of them were sitting on the high wine-cask beside Brett,
teaching her to drink out of the wine-skins. They had hung a wreath of garlics around her neck. Some one insisted
on giving her a glass. Somebody was teaching Bill a song. Singing it into his ear. Beating time on Bill's back.
I explained to them that I would be back. Outside in the street I went down the street looking for the shop that
made leather winebottles. The crowd was packed on the sidewalks and many of the shops were shuttered, and I
could not find it. I walked as far as the church, looking on both sides of the street. Then I asked a man and he took
me by the arm and led me to it. The shutters were up but the door was open.
Inside it smelled of fresh tanned leather and hot tar. A man was stencilling completed wine-skins. They hung
from the roof in bunches. He took one down, blew it up, screwed the nozzle tight, and then jumped on it.
"See! It doesn't leak."
"I want another one, too. A big one."
He took down a big one that would hold a gallon or more, from the roof. He blew it up, his cheeks puffing
http://www.en8848.com.cnahead of the wine-skin, and stood on the bota holding on to a chair.
"What are you going to do? Sell them in Bayonne?"
"No. Drink out of them."
He slapped me on the back.
"Good man. Eight pesetas for the two. The lowest price."
The man who was stencilling the new ones and tossing them into a pile stopped.
"It's true," he said. "Eight pesetas is cheap."
I paid and went out and along the street back to the wine-shop. It was darker than ever inside and very
crowded. I did not see Brett and Bill, and some one said they were in the back room. At the counter the girl filled
the two wine-skins for me. One held two litres. The other held five litres. Filling them both cost three pesetas sixty
centimos. Some one at the counter, that I had never seen before, tried to pay for the wine, but I finally paid for it
myself. The man who had wanted to pay then bought me a drink. He would not let me buy one in return, but said he
would take a rinse of the mouth from the new wine-bag. He tipped the big five-litre bag up and squeezed it so the
wine hissed against the back of his throat.
"All right," he said, and handed back the bag.
In the back room Brett and Bill were sitting on barrels surrounded by the dancers. Everybody had his arms on
everybody else's shoulders, and they were all singing. Mike was sitting at a table with several men in their
shirt-sleeves, eating from a bowl of tuna fish, chopped onions and vinegar. They were all drinking wine and
mopping up the oil and vinegar with pieces of bread.
"Hello, Jake. Hello!" Mike called. "Come here. I want you to meet my friends. We're all having an hors
d'oeuvre."
I was introduced to the people at the table. They supplied their names to Mike and sent for a fork for me.
"Stop eating their dinner, Michael," Brett shouted from the wine-barrels.
"I don't want to eat up your meal," I said when some one handed me a fork.
"Eat," he said. "What do you think it's here for?"
I unscrewed the nozzle of the big wine-bottle and handed it around. Every one took a drink, tipping the
wine-skin at arm's length.
Outside, above the singing, we could hear the music of the procession going by.
"Isn't that the procession?" Mike asked.
"Nada," some one said. "It's nothing. Drink up. Lift the bottle."
"Where did they find you?" I asked Mike.
"Some one brought me here," Mike said. "They said you were here."
"Where's Cohn?"
"He's passed out," Brett called. "They've put him away somewhere."
"Where is he?"
"I don't know."
"How should we know," Bill said. "I think he's dead."
"He's not dead," Mike said. "I know he's not dead. He's just passed out on Anis del Mono."
As he said Anis del Mono one of the men at the table looked up, brought out a bottle from inside his smock,
and handed it to me.
"No," I said. "No, thanks!"
"Yes. Yes. Arriba! Up with the bottle!"
I took a drink. It tasted of licorice and warmed all the way. I could feel it warming in my stomach.
"Where the hell is Cohn?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I don't know," Mike said. "I'll ask. Where is the drunken comrade?" he asked in Spanish.
"You want to see him?"
"Yes," I said.
"Not me," said Mike. "This gent."
The Anis del Mono man wiped his mouth and stood up.
"Come on."
In a back room Robert Cohn was sleeping quietly on some wine-casks. It was almost too dark to see his face.
They had covered him with a coat and another coat was folded under his head. Around his neck and on his chest
was a big wreath of twisted garlics.
"Let him sleep," the man whispered. "He's all right."
Two hours later Cohn appeared. He came into the front room still with the wreath of garlics around his neck.
The Spaniards shouted when he came in. Cohn wiped his eyes and grinned.
"I must have been sleeping," he said.
"Oh, not at all," Brett said.
"You were only dead," Bill said.
"Aren't we going to go and have some supper?" Cohn asked.
"Do you want to eat?"
"Yes. Why not? I'm hungry."
"Eat those garlics, Robert," Mike said. "I say. Do eat those garlics."
Cohn stood there. His sleep had made him quite all right.
"Do let's go and eat," Brett said. "I must get a bath."
"Come on," Bill said. "Let's translate Brett to the hotel."
We said good-bye to many people and shook hands with many people and went out. Outside it was dark.
"What time is it do you suppose?" Cohn asked.
"It's to-morrow," Mike said. "You've been asleep two days."
"No," said Cohn, "what time is it?"
"It's ten o'clock."
"What a lot we've drunk."
"You mean what a lot _we've_ drunk. You went to sleep."
Going down the dark streets to the hotel we saw the skyrockets going up in the square. Down the side streets
that led to the square we saw the square solid with people, those in the centre all dancing.
It was a big meal at the hotel. It was the first meal of the prices being doubled for the fiesta, and there were
several new courses. After the dinner we were out in the town. I remember resolving that I would stay up all night to
watch the bulls go through the streets at six o'clock in the morning, and being so sleepy that I went to bed around
four o'clock. The others stayed up.
My own room was locked and I could not find the key, so I went up-stairs and slept on one of the beds in
Cohn's room. The fiesta was going on outside in the night, but I was too sleepy for it to keep me awake. When I
woke it was the sound of the rocket exploding that announced the release of the bulls from the corrals at the edge of
town. They would race through the streets and out to the bull-ring. I had been sleeping heavily and I woke feeling I
was too late. I put on a coat of Cohn's and went out on the balcony. Down below the narrow street was empty. All
the balconies were crowded with people. Suddenly a crowd came down the street. They were all running, packed
close together. They passed along and up the street toward the bull-ring and behind them came more men running
faster, and then some stragglers who were really running. Behind them was a little bare space, and then the bulls
galloping, tossing their heads up and down. It all went out of sight around the corner. One man fell, rolled to the
http://www.en8848.com.cngutter, and lay quiet. But the bulls went right on and did not notice him. They were all running together.
After they went out of sight a great roar came from the bull-ring. It kept on. Then finally the pop of the rocket
that meant the bulls had gotten through the people in the ring and into the corrals. I went back in the room and got
into bed. I had been standing on the stone balcony in bare feet. I knew our crowd must have all been out at the
bull-ring. Back in bed, I went to sleep.
Cohn woke me when he came in. He started to undress and went over and closed the window because the
people on the balcony of the house just across the street were looking in.
"Did you see the show?" I asked.
"Yes. We were all there."
"Anybody get hurt?"
"One of the bulls got into the crowd in the ring and tossed six or eight people."
"How did Brett like it?"
"It was all so sudden there wasn't any time for it to bother anybody."
"I wish I'd been up."
"We didn't know where you were. We went to your room but it was locked."
"Where did you stay up?"
"We danced at some club."
"I got sleepy," I said.
"My gosh! I'm sleepy now," Cohn said. "Doesn't this thing ever stop?"
"Not for a week."
Bill opened the door and put his head in.
"Where were you, Jake?"
"I saw them go through from the balcony. How was it?"
"Grand."
"Where you going?"
"To sleep."
No one was up before noon. We ate at tables set out under the arcade. The town was full of people. We had to
wait for a table. After lunch we went over to the Irufla. It had filled up, and as the time for the bull-fight came it got
fuller, and the tables were crowded closer. There was a close, crowded hum that came every day before the
bull-fight. The café did not make this same noise at any other time, no matter how crowded it was. This hum went
on, and we were in it and a part of it.
I had taken six seats for all the fights. Three of them were barreras, the first row at the ring-side, and three
were sobrepuertos, seats with wooden backs, half-way up the amphitheatre. Mike thought Brett had best sit high up
for her first time, and Cohn wanted to sit with them. Bill and I were going to sit in the barreras, and I gave the extra
ticket to a waiter to sell. Bill said something to Cohn about what to do and how to look so he would not mind the
horses. Bill had seen one season of bull-fights.
"I'm not worried about how I'll stand it. I'm only afraid I may be bored," Cohn said.
"You think so?"
"Don't look at the horses, after the bull hits them," I said to Brett. "Watch the charge and see the picador try
and keep the bull off, but then don't look again until the horse is dead if it's been hit."
"I'm a little nervy about it," Brett said. "I'm worried whether I'll be able to go through with it all right."
"You'll be all right. There's nothing but that horse part that will bother you, and they're only in for a few
minutes with each bull. Just don't watch when it's bad."
"She'll be all right," Mike said. "I'll look after her."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I don't think you'll be bored," Bill said.
"I'm going over to the hotel to get the glasses and the wineskin," I said. "See you back here. Don't get
cock-eyed."
"I'll come along," Bill said. Brett smiled at us.
We walked around through the arcade to avoid the heat of the square.
"That Cohn gets me," Bill said. "He's got this Jewish superiority so strong that he thinks the only emotion he'll
get out of the fight will be being bored."
"We'll watch him with the glasses," I said.
"Oh, to hell with him!"
"He spends a lot of time there."
"I want him to stay there."
In the hotel on the stairs we met Montoya.
"Come on," said Montoya. "Do you want to meet Pedro Romero?"
"Fine," said Bill. "Let's go see him."
We followed Montoya up a flight and down the corridor.
"He's in room number eight," Montoya explained. "He's getting dressed for the bull-fight."
Montoya knocked on the door and opened it. It was a gloomy room with a little light coming in from the
window on the narrow street. There were two beds separated by a monastic partition. The electric light was on. The
boy stood very straight and unsmiling in his bull-fighting clothes. His jacket hung over the back of a chair. They
were just finishing winding his sash. His black hair shone under the electric light. He wore a white linen shirt and
the swordhandler finished his sash and stood up and stepped back. Pedro Romero nodded, seeming very far away
and dignified when we shook hands. Montoya said something about what great aficionados we were, and that we
wanted to wish him luck. Romero listened very seriously. Then he turned to me. He was the best-looking boy I have
ever seen.
"You go to the bull-fight," he said in English.
"You know English," I said, feeling like an idiot.
"No," he answered, and smiled.
One of three men who had been sitting on the beds came up and asked us if we spoke French. "Would you like
me to interpret for you? Is there anything you would like to ask Pedro Romero?"
We thanked him. What was there that you would like to ask? The boy was nineteen years old, alone except for
his sword-handlet and the three hangers-on, and the bull-fight was to commence in twenty minutes. We wished him
"Mucha suerte," shook hands, and went out. He was standing, straight and handsome and altogether by himself,
alone in the room with the hangers-on as we shut the door.
"He's a fine boy, don't you think so?" Montoya asked.
"He's a good-looking kid," I said.
"He looks like a torero," Montoya said. "He has the type."
"He's a fine boy."
"We'll see how he is in the ring," Montoya said.
We found the big leather wine-bottle leaning against the wall in my room, took it and the field-glasses, locked
the door, and went down-stairs.
It was a good bull-fight. Bill and I were very excited about Pedro Romero. Montoya was sitting about ten
places away. After Romero had killed his first bull Montoya caught my eye and nodded his head. This was a real
one. There had not been a real one for a long time. Of the other two matadors, one was very fair and the other was
passable. But there was no comparison with Romero, although neither of his bulls was much.
http://www.en8848.com.cnSeveral times during the bull-fight I looked up at Mike and Brett and Cohn, with the glasses. They seemed to
be all right. Brett did not look upset. All three were leaning forward on the concrete railing in front of them.
"Let me take the glasses," Bill said.
"Does Cohn look bored?" I asked.
"That kike!"
Outside the ring, after the bull-fight was over, you could not move in the crowd. We could not make our way
through but had to be moved with the whole thing, slowly, as a glacier, back to town. We had that disturbed
emotional feeling that always comes after a bull-fight, and the feeling of elation that comes after a good bullfight.
The fiesta was going on. The drums pounded and the pipe music was shrill, and everywhere the flow of the crowd
was broken by patches of dancers. The dancers were in a crowd, so you did not see the intricate play of the feet. All
you saw was the heads and shoulders going up and down, up and down. Finally, we got out of the crowd and made
for the café. The waiter saved chairs for the others, and we each ordered an absinthe and watched the crowd in the
square and the dancers.
"What do you suppose that dance is?" Bill asked.
"It's a sort of jota."
"They're not all the same," Bill said. "They dance differently to all the different tunes."
"It's swell dancing."
In front of us on a clear part of the street a company of boys were dancing. The steps were very intricate and
their faces were intent and concentrated. They all looked down while they danced. Their rope-soled shoes tapped
and spatted on the pavement. The toes touched. The heels touched. The balls of the feet touched. Then the music
broke wildly and the step was finished and they were all dancing on up the street.
"Here come the gentry," Bill said.
They were crossing the street.
"Hello, men," I said.
"Hello, gents!" said Brett. "You saved us seats? How nice."
"I say," Mike said, "that Romero what'shisname is somebody. Am I wrong?"
"Oh, isn't he lovely," Brett said. "And those green trousers."
"Brett never took her eyes off them."
"I say, I must borrow your glasses to-morrow."
"How did it go?"
"Wonderfully! Simply perfect. I say, it is a spectacle!"
"How about the horses?"
"I couldn't help looking at them."
"She couldn't take her eyes off them," Mike said. "She's an extraordinary wench."
"They do have some rather awful things happen to them," Brett said. "I couldn't look away, though."
"Did you feel all right?"
"I didn't feel badly at all."
"Robert Cohn did," Mike put in. "You were quite green, Robert."
"The first horse did bother me," Cohn said.
"You weren't bored, were you?" asked Bill.
Cohn laughed.
"No. I wasn't bored. I wish you'd forgive me that."
"It's all right," Bill said, "so long as you weren't bored."
"He didn't look bored," Mike said. "I thought he was going to be sick."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I never felt that bad. It was just for a minute."
"_I_ thought he was going to be sick. You weren't bored, were you, Robert?"
"Let up on that, Mike. I said I was sorry I said it."
"He was, you know. He was positively green."
"Oh, shove it along, Michael."
"You mustn't ever get bored at your first bull-fight, Robert," Mike said. "It might make such a mess."
"Oh, shove it along, Michael," Brett said.
"He said Brett was a sadist," Mike said. "Brett's not a sadist. She's just a lovely, healthy wench."
"Are you a sadist, Brett?" I asked.
"Hope not."
"He said Brett was a sadist just because she has a good, healthy stomach."
"Won't be healthy long."
Bill got Mike started on something else than Cohn. The waiter brought the absinthe glasses.
"Did you really like it?" Bill asked Cohn.
"No, I can't say I liked it. I think it's a wonderful show."
"Gad, yes! What a spectacle!" Brett said.
"I wish they didn't have the horse part," Cohn said.
"They're not important," Bill said. "After a while you never notice anything disgusting."
"It is a bit strong just at the start," Brett said. "There's a dreadful moment for me just when the bull starts for
the horse."
"The bulls were fine," Cohn said.
"They were very good," Mike said.
"I want to sit down below, next time." Brett drank from her glass of absinthe.
"She wants to see the bull-fighters close by," Mike said.
"They are something," Brett said. "That Romero lad is just a child."
"He's a damned good-looking boy," I said. "When we were up in his room I never saw a better-looking kid."
"How old do you suppose he is?"
"Nineteen or twenty."
"Just imagine it."
The bull-fight on the second day was much better than on the first. Brett sat between Mike and me at the
barrera, and Bill and Cohn went up above. Romero was the whole show. I do not think Brett saw any other
bull-fighter. No one else did either, except the hard-shelled technicians. It was all Romero. There were two other
matadors, but they did not count. I sat beside Brett and explained to Brett what it was all about. I told her about
watching the bull, not the horse, when the bulls charged the picadors, and got her to watching the picador place the
point of his pic so that she saw what it was all about, so that it became more something that was going on with a
definite end, and less of a spectacle with unexplained horrors. I had her watch how Romero took the bull away from
a fallen horse with his cape, and how he held him with the cape and turned him, smoothly and suavely, never
wasting the bull. She saw how Romero avoided every brusque movement and saved his bulls for the last when he
wanted them, not winded and discomposed but smoothly worn down. She saw how close Romero always worked to
the bull, and I pointed out to her the tricks the other bull-fighters used to make it look as though they were working
closely. She saw why she liked Romero's cape-work and why she did not like the others.
Romero never made any contortions, always it was straight and pure and natural in line. The others twisted
themselves like corkscrews, their elbows raised, and leaned against the flanks of the bull after his horns had passed,
to give a faked look of danger. Afterward, all that was faked turned bad and gave an unpleasant feeling. Romero's
http://www.en8848.com.cnbull-fighting gave real emotion, because he kept the absolute purity of line in his movements and always quietly and
calmly let the horns pass him close each time. He did not have to emphasize their closeness. Brett saw how
something that was beautiful done close to the bull was ridiculous if it were done a little way off. I told her how
since the death of Joselito all the bull-fighters had been developing a technique that simulated this appearance of
danger in order to give a fake emotional feeling, while the bull-fighter was really safe. Romero had the old thing,
the holding of his purity of line through the maximum of exposure, while he dominated the bull by making him
realize he was unattainable, while he prepared him for the killing.
"I've never seen him do an awkward thing," Brett said.
"You won't until he gets frightened," I said.
"He'll never be frightened," Mike said. "He knows too damned much."
"He knew everything when he started. The others can't ever learn what he was born with."
"And God, what looks," Brett said.
"I believe, you know, that she's falling in love with this bullfighter chap," Mike said.
"I wouldn't be surprised."
"Be a good chap, Jake. Don't tell her anything more about him. Tell her how they beat their old mothers."
"Tell me what drunks they are."
"Oh, frightful," Mike said. "Drunk all day and spend all their time beating their poor old mothers."
"He looks that way," Brett said.
"Doesn't he?" I said.
They had hitched the mules to the dead bull and then the whips cracked, the men ran, and the mules, straining
forward, their legs pushing, broke into a gallop, and the bull, one horn up, his head on its side, swept a swath
smoothly across the sand and out the red gate.
"This next is the last one."
"Not really," Brett said. She leaned forward on the barrera. Romero waved his picadors to their places, then
stood, his cape against his chest, looking across the ring to where the bull would come out.
After it was over we went out and were pressed tight in the crowd.
"These bull-fights are hell on one," Brett said. "I'm limp as a rag."
"Oh, you'll get a drink," Mike said.
The next day Pedro Romero did not fight. It was Miura bulls, and a very bad bull-fight. The next day there
was no bull-fight scheduled. But all day and all night the fiesta kept on.
http://www.en8848.com.cn16
In the morning it was raining. A fog had come over the mountains from the sea. You could not see the tops of
the mountains. The plateau was dull and gloomy, and the shapes of the trees and the houses were changed. I walked
out beyond the town to look at the weather. The bad weather was coming over the mountains from the sea.
The flags in the square hung wet from the white poles and the banners were wet and hung damp against the
front of the houses, and in between the steady drizzle the rain came down and drove every one under the arcades
and made pools of water in the square, and the streets wet and dark and deserted; yet the fiesta kept up without any
pause. It was only driven under cover.
The covered seats of the bull-ring had been crowded with people sitting out of the rain watching the concourse
of Basque and Navarrais dancers and singers, and afterward the Val Carlos dancers in their costumes danced down
the street in the rain, the drums sounding hollow and damp, and the chiefs of the bands riding ahead on their big,
heavy-footed horses, their costumes wet, the horses' coats wet in the rain. The crowd was in the cafés and the
dancers came in, too, and sat, their tight-wound white legs under the tables, shaking the water from their belled caps,
and spreading their red and purple jackets over the chairs to dry. It was raining hard outside.
I left the crowd in the café and went over to the hotel to get shaved for dinner. I was shaving in my room when
there was a knock on the door.
"Come in," I called.
Montoya walked in.
"How are you?" he said.
"Fine," I said.
"No bulls to-day."
"No," I said, "nothing but rain."
"Where are your friends?"
"Over at the Iruña."
Montoya smiled his embarrassed smile.
"Look," he said. "Do you know the American ambassador?"
"Yes," I said. "Everybody knows the American ambassador."
"He's here in town, now."
"Yes," I said. "Everybody's seen them."
"I've seen them, too," Montoya said. He didn't say anything. I went on shaving.
"Sit down," I said. "Let me send for a drink."
"No, I have to go."
I finished shaving and put my face down into the bowl and washed it with cold water. Montoya was standing
there looking more embarrassed.
"Look," he said. "I've just had a message from them at the Grand Hotel that they want Pedro Romero and
Marcial Lalanda to come over for coffee to-night after dinner."
"Well," I said, "it can't hurt Marcial any."
"Marcial has been in San Sebastian all day. He drove over in a car this morning with Marquez. I don't think
they'll be back tonight."
Montoya stood embarrassed. He wanted me to say something.
"Don't give Romero the message," I said.
"You think so?"
"Absolutely."
http://www.en8848.com.cnMontoya was very pleased.
"I wanted to ask you because you were an American," he said.
"That's what I'd do."
"Look," said Montoya. "People take a boy like that. They don't know what he's worth. They don't know what
he means. Any foreigner can flatter him. They start this Grand Hotel business, and in one year they're through."
"Like Algabeno," I said.
"Yes, like Algabeno."
"They're a fine lot," I said. "There's one American woman down here now that collects bull-fighters."
"I know. They only want the young ones."
"Yes," I said. "The old ones get fat."
"Or crazy like Gallo."
"Well," I said, "it's easy. All you have to do is not give him the message."
"He's such a fine boy," said Montoya. "He ought to stay with his own people. He shouldn't mix in that stuff."
"Won't you have a drink?" I asked.
"No," said Montoya, "I have to go." He went out.
I went down-stairs and out the door and took a walk around through the arcades around the square. It was still
raining. I looked in at the Irufla for the gang and they were not there, so I walked on around the square and back to
the hotel. They were eating dinner in the down-stairs dining-room.
They were well ahead of me and it was no use trying to catch them. Bill was buying shoe-shines for Mike.
Bootblacks opened the street door and each one Bill called over and started to work on Mike.
"This is the eleventh time my boots have been polished," Mike said. "I say, Bill is an ass."
The bootblacks had evidently spread the report. Another came in.
"Limpia botas?" he said to Bill.
"No," said Bill. "For this Señor."
The bootblack knelt down beside the one at work and started on Mike's free shoe that shone already in the
electric light.
"Bill's a yell of laughter," Mike said.
I was drinking red wine, and so far behind them that I felt a little uncomfortable about all this shoe-shining. I
looked around the room. At the next table was Pedro Romero. He stood up when I nodded, and asked me to come
over and meet a friend. His table was beside ours, almost touching. I met the friend, a Madrid bullfight critic, a little
man with a drawn face. I told Romero how much I liked his work, and he was very pleased. We talked Spanish and
the critic knew a little French. I reached to our table for my winebottle, but the critic took my arm. Romero laughed.
"Drink here," he said in English.
He was very bashful about his English, but he was really very pleased with it, and as we went on talking he
brought out words he was not sure of, and asked me about them. He was anxious to know the English for _Corrida
de toros_, the exact translation. Bull-fight he was suspicious of. I explained that bull-fight in Spanish was the
_lidia_ of a _toro_. The Spanish word _corrida_ means in English the running of bulls--the French translation is
_Course de taureaux_. The critic put that in. There is no Spanish word for bull-fight.
Pedro Romero said he had learned a little English in Gibraltar. He was born in Ronda. That is not far above
Gibraltar. He started bull-fighting in Malaga in the bull-fighting school there. He had only been at it three years. The
bull-fight critic joked him about the number of _Malagueno_ expressions he used. He was nineteen years old, he
said. His older brother was with him as a banderillero, but he did not live in this hotel. He lived in a smaller hotel
with the other people who worked for Romero. He asked me how many times I had seen him in the ring. I told him
only three. It was really only two, but I did not want to explain after I had made the mistake.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Where did you see me the other time? In Madrid?"
"Yes," I lied. I had read the accounts of his two appearances in Madrid in the bull-fight papers, so I was all
right.
"The first or the second time?"
"The first."
"I was very bad," he said. "The second time I was better. You remember?" He turned to the critic.
He was not at all embarrassed. He talked of his work as something altogether apart from himself. There was
nothing conceited or braggartly about him.
"I like it very much that you like my work," he said. "But you haven't seen it yet. To-morrow, if I get a good
bull, I will try and show it to you."
When he said this he smiled, anxious that neither the bull-fight critic nor I would think he was boasting.
"I am anxious to see it," the critic said. "I would like to be convinced."
"He doesn't like my work much." Romero turned to me. He was serious.
The critic explained that he liked it very much, but that so far it had been incomplete.
"Wait till to-morrow, if a good one comes out."
"Have you seen the bulls for to-morrow?" the critic asked me.
"Yes. I saw them unloaded."
Pedro Romero leaned forward.
"What did you think of them?"
"Very nice," I said. "About twenty-six arrobas. Very short horns. Haven't you seen them?"
"Oh, yes," said Romero.
"They won't weigh twenty-six arrobas," said the critic.
"No," said Romero.
"They've got bananas for horns," the critic said.
"You call them bananas?" asked Romero. He turned to me and smiled. "_You_ wouldn't call them bananas?"
"No," I said. "They're horns all right."
"They're very short," said Pedro Romero. "Very, very short. Still, they aren't bananas."
"I say, Jake," Brett called from the next table, "you _have_ deserted us."
"Just temporarily," I said. "We're talking bulls."
"You _are_ superior."
"Tell him that bulls have no balls," Mike shouted. He was drunk.
Romero looked at me inquiringly.
"Drunk," I said. "Borracho! Muy borracho!"
"You might introduce your friends," Brett said. She had not stopped looking at Pedro Romero. I asked them if
they would like to have coffee with us. They both stood up. Romero's face was very brown. He had very nice
manners.
I introduced them all around and they started to sit down, but there was not enough room, so we all moved
over to the big table by the wall to have coffee. Mike ordered a bottle of Fundador and glasses for everybody. There
was a lot of drunken talking.
"Tell him I think writing is lousy," Bill said. "Go on, tell him. Tell him I'm ashamed of being a writer."
Pedro Romero was sitting beside Brett and listening to her.
"Go on. Tell him!" Bill said.
Romero looked up smiling.
"This gentleman," I said, "is a writer."
http://www.en8848.com.cnRomero was impressed. "This other one, too," I said, pointing at Cohn.
"He looks like Villalta," Romero said, looking at Bill. "Rafael, doesn't he look like Villalta?"
"I can't see it," the critic said.
"Really," Romero said in Spanish. "He looks a lot like Villalta. What does the drunken one do?"
"Nothing."
"Is that why he drinks?"
"No. He's waiting to marry this lady."
"Tell him bulls have no balls!" Mike shouted, very drunk, from the other end of the table.
"What does he say?"
"He's drunk."
"Jake," Mike called. "Tell him bulls have no balls!"
"You understand?" I said.
"Yes."
I was sure he didn't, so it was all right.
"Tell him Brett wants to see him put on those green pants."
"Pipe down, Mike."
"Tell him Brett is dying to know how he can get into those pants."
"Pipe down."
During this Romero was fingering his glass and talking with Brett. Brett was talking French and he was
talking Spanish and a little English, and laughing.
Bill was filling the glasses.
"Tell him Brett wants to come into--"
"Oh, pipe down, Mike, for Christ's sake!"
Romero looked up smiling. "Pipe down! I know that," he said.
Just then Montoya came into the room. He started to smile at me, then he saw Pedro Romero with a big glass
of cognac in his hand, sitting laughing between me and a woman with bare shoulders, at a table full of drunks. He
did not even nod.
Montoya went out of the room. Mike was on his feet proposing a toast. "Let's all drink to--" he began. "Pedro
Romero," I said. Everybody stood up. Romero took it very seriously, and we touched glasses and drank it down, I
rushing it a little because Mike was trying to make it clear that that was not at all what he was going to drink to. But
it went off all right, and Pedro Romero shook hands with every one and he and the critic went out together.
"My God! he's a lovely boy," Brett said. "And how I would love to see him get into those clothes. He must use
a shoe-horn."
"I started to tell him," Mike began. "And Jake kept interrupting me. Why do you interrupt me? Do you think
you talk Spanish better than I do?"
"Oh, shut up, Mike! Nobody interrupted you."
"No, I'd like to get this settled." He turned away from me. "Do you think you amount to something, Cohn? Do
you think you belong here among us? People who are out to have a good time? For God's sake don't be so noisy,
Cohn!"
"Oh, cut it out, Mike," Cohn said.
"Do you think Brett wants you here? Do you think you add to the party? Why don't you say something?"
"I said all I had to say the other night, Mike."
"I'm not one of you literary chaps." Mike stood shakily and leaned against the table. "I'm not clever. But I do
know when I'm not wanted. Why don't you see when you're not wanted, Cohn? Go away. Go away, for God's sake.
http://www.en8848.com.cnTake that sad Jewish face away. Don't you think I'm right?"
He looked at us.
"Sure," I said. "Let's all go over to the Iruña."
"No. Don't you think I'm right? I love that woman."
"Oh, don't start that again. Do shove it along, Michael," Brett said.
"Don't you think I'm right, Jake?"
Cohn still sat at the table. His face had the sallow, yellow look it got when he was insulted, but somehow he
seemed to be enjoying it. The childish, drunken heroics of it. It was his affair with a lady of title.
"Jake," Mike said. He was almost crying. "You know I'm right. Listen, you!" He turned to Cohn: "Go away!
Go away now!"
"But I won't go, Mike," said Cohn.
"Then I'll make you!" Mike started toward him around the table. Cohn stood up and took off his glasses. He
stood waiting, his face sallow, his hands fairly low, proudly and firmly waiting for the assault, ready to do battle for
his lady love.
I grabbed Mike. "Come on to the café," I said. "You can't hit him here in the hotel."
"Good!" said Mike. "Good idea!"
We started off. I looked back as Mike stumbled up the stairs and saw Cohn putting his glasses on again. Bill
was sitting at the table pouring another glass of Fundador. Brett was sitting looking straight ahead at nothing.
Outside on the square it had stopped raining and the moon was trying to get through the clouds. There was a
wind blowing. The military band was playing and the crowd was massed on the far side of the square where the
fireworks specialist and his son were trying to send up fire balloons. A balloon would start up jerkily, on a great bias,
and be torn by the wind or blown against the houses of the square. Some fell into the crowd. The magnesium flared
and the fireworks exploded and chased about in the crowd. There was no one dancing in the square. The gravel was
too wet.
Brett came out with Bill and joined us. We stood in the crowd and watched Don Manuel Orquito, the
fireworks king, standing on a little platform, carefully starting the balloons with sticks, standing above the heads of
the crowd to launch the balloons off into the wind. The wind brought them all down, and Don Manuel Orquito's face
was sweaty in the light of his complicated fireworks that fell into the crowd and charged and chased, sputtering and
cracking, between the legs of the people. The people shouted as each new luminous paper bubble careened, caught
fire, and fell.
"They're razzing Don Manuel," Bill said.
"How do you know he's Don Manuel?" Brett said.
"His name's on the programme. Don Manuel Orquito, the pirotecnico of esta ciudad."
"Globos illuminados," Mike said. "A collection of globos illuminados. That's what the paper said."
The wind blew the band music away.
"I say, I wish one would go up," Brett said. "That Don Manuel chap is furious."
"He's probably worked for weeks fixing them to go off, spelling out 'Hail to San Fermin,' " Bill said.
"Globos illuminados," Mike said. "A bunch of bloody globos illuminados."
"Come on," said Brett. "We can't stand here."
"Her ladyship wants a drink," Mike said.
"How you know things," Brett said.
Inside, the café was crowded and very noisy. No one noticed us come in. We could not find a table. There was
a great noise going on.
"Come on, let's get out of here," Bill said.
http://www.en8848.com.cnOutside the paseo was going in under the arcade. There were some English and Americans from Biarritz in
sport clothes scattered at the tables. Some of the women stared at the people going by with lorgnons. We had
acquired, at some time, a friend of Bill's from Biarritz. She was staying with another girl at the Grand Hotel. The
other girl had a headache and had gone to bed.
"Here's the pub," Mike said. It was the Bar Milano, a small, tough bar where you could get food and where
they danced in the back room. We all sat down at a table and ordered a bottle of Fundador. The bar was not full.
There was nothing going on.
"This is a hell of a place," Bill said.
"It's too early."
"Let's take the bottle and come back later," Bill said. "I don't want to sit here on a night like this."
"Let's go and look at the English," Mike said. "I love to look at the English."
"They're awful," Bill said. "Where did they all come from?"
"They come from Biarritz," Mike said. "They come to see the last day of the quaint little Spanish fiesta."
"I'll festa them," Bill said.
"You're an extraordinarily beautiful girl." Mike turned to Bill's friend. "When did you come here?"
"Come off it, Michael."
"I say, she _is_ a lovely girl. Where have I been? Where have I been looking all this while? You're a lovely
thing. _Have_ we met? Come along with me and Bill. We're going to festa the English."
"I'll festa them," Bill said. "What the hell are they doing at this fiesta?"
"Come on," Mike said. "Just us three. We're going to festa the bloody English. I hope you're not English? I'm
Scotch. I hate the English. I'm going to festa them. Come on, Bill."
Through the window we saw them, all three arm in arm, going toward the café. Rockets were going up in the
square.
"I'm going to sit here," Brett said.
"I'll stay with you," Cohn said.
"Oh, don't!" Brett said. "For God's sake, go off somewhere. Can't you see Jake and I want to talk?"
"I didn't," Cohn said. "I thought I'd sit here because I felt a little tight."
"What a hell of a reason for sitting with any one. If you're tight, go to bed. Go on to bed."
"Was I rude enough to him?" Brett asked. Cohn was gone. "My God! I'm so sick of him!"
"He doesn't add much to the gayety."
"He depresses me so."
"He's behaved very badly."
"Damned badly. He had a chance to behave so well."
"He's probably waiting just outside the door now."
"Yes. He would. You know I do know how he feels. He can't believe it didn't mean anything."
"I know."
"Nobody else would behave as badly. Oh, I'm so sick of the whole thing. And Michael. Michael's been lovely,
too."
"It's been damned hard on Mike."
"Yes. But he didn't need to be a swine."
"Everybody behaves badly," I said. "Give them the proper chance."
"You wouldn't behave badly." Brett looked at me.
"I'd be as big an ass as Cohn," I said.
"Darling, don't let's talk a lot of rot."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"All right. Talk about anything you like."
"Don't be difficult. You're the only person I've got, and I feel rather awful to-night."
"You've got Mike."
"Yes, Mike. Hasn't he been pretty?"
"Well," I said, "it's been damned hard on Mike, having Cohn around and seeing him with you."
"Don't I know it, darling? Please don't make me feel any worse than I do."
Brett was nervous as I had never seen her before. She kept looking away from me and looking ahead at the
wall.
"Want to go for a walk?"
"Yes. Come on."
I corked up the Fundador bottle and gave it to the bartender.
"Let's have one more drink of that," Brett said. "My nerves are rotten."
We each drank a glass of the smooth amontillado brandy.
"Come on," said Brett.
As we came out the door I saw Cohn walk out from under the arcade.
"He _was_ there," Brett said.
"He can't be away from you."
"Poor devil!"
"I'm not sorry for him. I hate him, myself."
"I hate him, too," she shivered. "I hate his damned suffering."
We walked arm in arm down the side Street away from the crowd and the lights of the square. The street was
dark and wet, and we walked along it to the fortifications at the edge of town. We passed wine-shops with light
coming out from their doors onto the black, wet street, and sudden bursts of music.
"Want to go in?"
"No."
We walked out across the wet grass and onto the stone wall of the fortifications. I spread a newspaper on the
stone and Brett sat down. Across the plain it was dark, and we could see the mountains. The wind was high up and
took the clouds across the moon. Below us were the dark pits of the fortifications. Behind were the trees and the
shadow of the cathedral, and the town silhouetted against the moon.
"Don't feel bad," I said.
"I feel like hell," Brett said. "Don't let's talk."
We looked out at the plain. The long lines of trees were dark in the moonlight. There were the lights of a car
on the road climbing the mountain. Up on the top of the mountain we saw the lights of the fort. Below to the left
was the river. It was high from the rain, and black and smooth. Trees were dark along the banks. We sat and looked
out. Brett stared straight ahead. Suddenly she shivered.
"It's cold."
"Want to walk back?"
"Through the park."
We climbed down. It was clouding over again. In the park it was dark under the trees.
"Do you still love me, Jake?"
"Yes," I said.
"Because I'm a goner," Brett said.
"How?"
"I'm a goner. I'm mad about the Romero boy. I'm in love with him, I think."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I wouldn't be if I were you."
"I can't help it. I'm a goner. It's tearing me all up inside."
"Don't do it."
"I can't help it. I've never been able to help anything."
"You ought to stop it."
"How can I stop it? I can't stop things. Feel that?"
Her hand was trembling.
"I'm like that all through."
"You oughtn't to do it."
"I can't help it. I'm a goner now, anyway. Don't you see the difference?"
"No."
"I've got to do something. I've got to do something I really want to do. I've lost my self-respect."
"You don't have to do that."
"Oh, darling, don't be difficult. What do you think it's meant to have that damned Jew about, and Mike the
way he's acted?"
"Sure."
"I can't just stay tight all the time."
"No."
"Oh, darling, please stay by me. Please stay by me and see me through this."
"Sure."
"I don't say it's right. It is right though for me. God knows, I've never felt such a bitch."
"What do you want me to do?"
"Come on," Brett said. "Let's go and find him."
Together we walked down the gravel path in the park in the dark, under the trees and then out from under the
trees and past the gate into the Street that led into town.
Pedro Romero was in the café. He was at a table with other bullfighters and bull-fight critics. They were
smoking cigars. When we came in they looked up. Romero smiled and bowed. We sat down at a table half-way
down the room.
"Ask him to come over and have a drink."
"Not yet. He'll come over."
"I can't look at him."
"He's nice to look at," I said.
"I've always done just what I wanted."
"I know."
"I do feel such a bitch."
"Well," I said.
"My God!" said Brett, "the things a woman goes through."
"Yes?"
"Oh, I do feel such a bitch."
I looked across at the table. Pedro Romero smiled. He said something to the other people at his table, and
stood up. He came over to our table. I stood up and we shook hands.
"Won't you have a drink?"
"You must have a drink with me," he said. He seated himself, asking Brett's permission without saying
anything. He had very nice manners. But he kept on smoking his cigar. It went well with his face.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"You like cigars?" I asked.
"Oh, yes. I always smoke cigars."
It was part of his system of authority. It made him seem older. I noticed his skin. It was clear and smooth and
very brown. There was a triangular scar on his cheek-bone. I saw he was watching Brett. He felt there was
something between them. He must have felt it when Brett gave him her hand. He was being very careful. I think he
was sure, but he did not want to make any mistake.
"You fight to-morrow?" I said.
"Yes," he said. "Algabeno was hurt to-day in Madrid. Did you hear?"
"No," I said. "Badly?"
He shook his head.
"Nothing. Here," he showed his hand. Brett reached out and spread the fingers apart.
"Oh!" he said in English, "you tell fortunes?"
"Sometimes. Do you mind?"
"No. I like it." He spread his hand flat on the table. "Tell me I live for always, and be a millionaire."
He was still very polite, but he was surer of himself. "Look," he said, "do you see any bulls in my hand?"
He laughed. His hand was very fine and the wrist was small.
"There are thousands of bulls," Brett said. She was not at all nervous now. She looked lovely.
"Good," Romero laughed. "At a thousand duros apiece," he said to me in Spanish. "Tell me some more."
"It's a good hand," Brett said. "I think he'll live a long time."
"Say it to me. Not to your friend."
"I said you'd live a long time."
"I know it," Romero said. "I'm never going to die."
I tapped with my finger-tips on the table. Romero saw it. He shook his head.
"No. Don't do that. The bulls are my best friends."
I translated to Brett.
"You kill your friends?" she asked.
"Always," he said in English, and laughed. "So they don't kill me." He looked at her across the table.
"You know English well."
"Yes," he said. "Pretty well, sometimes. But I must not let anybody know. It would be very bad, a torero who
speaks English."
"Why?" asked Brett.
"It would be bad. The people would not like it. Not yet."
"Why not?"
"They would not like it. Bull-fighters are not like that."
"What are bull-fighters like?"
He laughed and tipped his hat down over his eyes and changed the angle of his cigar and the expression of his
face.
"Like at the table," he said. I glanced over. He had mimicked exactly the expression of Nacional. He smiled,
his face natural again. "No. I must forget English."
"Don't forget it, yet," Brett said.
"No?"
"No."
"All right."
He laughed again.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I would like a hat like that," Brett said.
"Good. I'll get you one."
"Right. See that you do."
"I will. I'll get you one to-night."
I stood up. Romero rose, too.
"Sit down," I said. "I must go and find our friends and bring them here."
He looked at me. It was a final look to ask if it were understood. It was understood all right.
"Sit down," Brett said to him. "You must teach me Spanish."
He sat down and looked at her across the table. I went out. The hard-eyed people at the bull-fighter table
watched me go. It was not pleasant. When I came back and looked in the café, twenty minutes later, Brett and Pedro
Romero were gone. The coffee-glasses and our three empty cognac-glasses were on the table. A waiter came with a
cloth and picked up the glasses and mopped off the table.
http://www.en8848.com.cn17
Outside the Bar Milano I found Bill and Mike and Edna. Edna was the girl's name.
"We've been thrown out," Edna said.
"By the police," said Mike. "There's some people in there that don't like me."
"I've kept them out of four fights," Edna said. "You've got to help me."
Bill's face was red.
"Come back in, Edna," he said. "Go on in there and dance with Mike."
"It's silly," Edna said. "There'll just be another row."
"Damned Biarritz swine," Bill said.
"Come on," Mike said. "After all, it's a pub. They can't occupy a whole pub."
"Good old Mike," Bill said. "Damned English swine come here and insult Mike and try and spoil the fiesta."
"They're so bloody," Mike said. "I hate the English."
"They can't insult Mike," Bill said. "Mike is a swell fellow. They can't insult Mike. I won't stand it. Who cares
if he is a damn bankrupt?" His voice broke.
"Who cares?" Mike said. "I don't care. Jake doesn't care. Do _you_ care?"
"No," Edna said. "Are you a bankrupt?"
"Of course I am. You don't care, do you, Bill?"
Bill put his arm around Mike's shoulder.
"I wish to hell I was a bankrupt. I'd show those bastards."
"They're just English," Mike said. "It never makes any difference what the English say."
"The dirty swine," Bill said. "I'm going to clean them out."
"Bill," Edna looked at me. "Please don't go in again, Bill. They're so stupid."
"That's it," said Mike. "They're stupid. I knew that was what it was."
"They can't say things like that about Mike," Bill said.
"Do you know them?" I asked Mike.
"No. I never saw them. They say they know me."
"I won't stand it," Bill said.
"Come on. Let's go over to the Suizo," I said.
"They're a bunch of Edna's friends from Biarritz," Bill said.
"They're simply stupid," Edna said.
"One of them's Charley Blackman, from Chicago," Bill said.
"I was never in Chicago," Mike said.
Edna started to laugh and could not stop.
"Take me away from here," she said, "you bankrupts."
"What kind of a row was it?" I asked Edna. We were walking across the square to the Suizo. Bill was gone.
"I don't know what happened, but some one had the police called to keep Mike out of the back room. There
were some people that had known Mike at Cannes. What's the matter with Mike?"
"Probably he owes them money," I said. "That's what people usually get bitter about."
In front of the ticket-booths out in the square there were two lines of people waiting. They were sitting on
chairs or crouched on the ground with blankets and newspapers around them. They were waiting for the wickets to
open in the morning to buy tickets for the bull-fight. The night was clearing and the moon was out. Some of the
people in the line were sleeping.
At the Café Suizo we had just sat down and ordered Fundador when Robert Cohn came up.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Where's Brett?" he asked.
"I don't know."
"She was with you."
"She must have gone to bed."
"She's not."
"I don't know where she is."
His face was sallow under the light. He was standing up.
"Tell me where she is."
"Sit down," I said. "I don't know where she is."
"The hell you don't!"
"You can shut your face."
"Tell me where Brett is."
"I'll not tell you a damn thing."
"You know where she is."
"If I did I wouldn't tell you."
"Oh, go to hell, Cohn," Mike called from the table. "Brett's gone off with the bull-fighter chap. They're on
their honeymoon."
"You shut up."
"Oh, go to hell!" Mike said languidly.
"Is that where she is?" Cohn turned to me.
"Go to hell!"
"She was with you. Is that where she is?"
"Go to hell!"
"I'll make you tell me"--he stepped forward--"you damned pimp."
I swung at him and he ducked. I saw his face duck sideways in the light. He hit me and I sat down on the
pavement. As I started to get on my feet he hit me twice. I went down backward under a table. I tried to get up and
felt I did not have any legs. I felt I must get on my feet and try and hit him. Mike helped me up. Some one poured a
carafe of water on my head. Mike had an arm around me, and I found I was sitting on a chair. Mike was pulling at
my ears.
"I say, you were cold," Mike said.
"Where the hell were you?"
"Oh, I was around."
"You didn't want to mix in it?"
"He knocked Mike down, too," Edna said.
"He didn't knock me out," Mike said. "I just lay there."
"Does this happen every night at your fiestas?" Edna asked. "Wasn't that Mr. Cohn?"
"I'm all right," I said. "My head's a little wobbly."
There were several waiters and a crowd of people standing around.
"Vaya!" said Mike. "Get away. Go on."
The waiters moved the people away.
"It was quite a thing to watch," Edna said. "He must be a boxer."
"He is."
"I wish Bill had been here," Edna said. "I'd like to have seen Bill knocked down, too. I've always wanted to
see Bill knocked down. He's so big."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"I was hoping he would knock down a waiter," Mike said, "and get arrested. I'd like to see Mr. Robert Cohn in
jail."
"No," I said.
"Oh, no," said Edna. "You don't mean that."
"I do, though," Mike said. "I'm not one of these chaps likes being knocked about. I never play games, even."
Mike took a drink.
"I never liked to hunt, you know. There was always the danger of having a horse fall on you. How do you feel,
Jake?"
"All right."
"You're nice," Edna said to Mike. "Are you really a bankrupt?"
"I'm a tremendous bankrupt," Mike said. "I owe money to everybody. Don't you owe any money?"
"Tons."
"I owe everybody money," Mike said. "I borrowed a hundred pesetas from Montoya to-night."
"The hell you did," I said.
"I'll pay it back," Mike said. "I always pay everything back."
"That's why you're a bankrupt, isn't it?" Edna said.
I stood up. I had heard them talking from a long way away. It all seemed like some bad play.
"I'm going over to the hotel," I said. Then I heard them talking about me.
"Is he all right?" Edna asked.
"We'd better walk with him."
"I'm all right," I said. "Don't come. I'll see you all later."
I walked away from the café. They were sitting at the table. I looked back at them and at the empty tables.
There was a waiter sitting at one of the tables with his head in his hands.
Walking across the square to the hotel everything looked new and changed. I had never seen the trees before. I
had never seen the flagpoles before, nor the front of the theatre. It was all different. I felt as I felt once coming home
from an out-of-town football game. I was carrying a suitcase with my football things in it, and I walked up the street
from the station in the town I had lived in all my life and it was all new. They were raking the lawns and burning
leaves in the road, and I stopped for a long time and watched. It was all strange. Then I went on, and my feet
seemed to be a long way off, and everything seemed to come from a long way off, and I could hear my feet walking
a great distance away. I had been kicked in the head early in the game. It was like that crossing the square. It was
like that going up the stairs in the hotel. Going up the stairs took a long time, and I had the feeling that I was
carrying my suitcase. There was a light in the room. Bill came out and met me in the hall.
"Say," he said, "go up and see Cohn. He's been in a jam, and he's asking for you."
"The hell with him."
"Go on. Go on up and see him."
I did not want to climb another flight of stairs.
"What are you looking at me that way for?"
"I'm not looking at you. Go on up and see Cohn. He's in bad shape."
"You were drunk a little while ago," I said.
"I'm drunk now," Bill said. "But you go up and see Cohn. He wants to see you."
"All right," I said. It was just a matter of climbing more stairs. I went on up the stairs carrying my phantom
suitcase. I walked down the hail to Cohn's room. The door was shut and I knocked.
"Who is it?"
"Barnes."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Come in, Jake."
I opened the door and went in, and set down my suitcase. There was no light in the room. Cohn was lying,
face down, on the bed in the dark.
"Hello, Jake."
"Don't call me Jake."
I stood by the door. It was just like this that I had come home. Now it was a hot bath that I needed. A deep, hot
bath, to lie back in.
"Where's the bathroom?" I asked.
Cohn was crying. There he was, face down on the bed, crying.
He had on a white polo shirt, the kind he'd worn at Princeton.
"I'm sorry, Jake. Please forgive me."
"Forgive you, hell."
"Please forgive me, Jake."
I did not say anything. I stood there by the door.
"I was crazy. You must see how it was."
"Oh, that's all right."
"I couldn't stand it about Brett."
"You called me a pimp."
I did not care. I wanted a hot bath. I wanted a hot bath in deep water.
"I know. Please don't remember it. I was crazy."
"That's all right."
He was crying. His voice was funny. He lay there in his white shirt on the bed in the dark. His polo shirt.
"I'm going away in the morning."
He was crying without making any noise.
"I just couldn't stand it about Brett. I've been through hell, Jake. It's been simply hell. When I met her down
here Brett treated me as though I were a perfect stranger. I just couldn't stand it. We lived together at San Sebastian.
I suppose you know it. I can't stand it any more."
He lay there on the bed.
"Well," I said, "I'm going to take a bath."
"You were the only friend I had, and I loved Brett so."
"Well," I said, "so long."
"I guess it isn't any use," he said. "I guess it isn't any damn use."
"What?"
"Everything. Please say you forgive me, Jake."
"Sure," I said. "It's all right."
"I felt so terribly. I've been through such hell, Jake. Now everything's gone. Everything."
"Well," I said, "so long. I've got to go."
He rolled over sat on the edge of the bed, and then stood up.
"So long, Jake," he said. "You'll shake hands, won't you?"
"Sure. Why not?"
We shook hands. In the dark I could not see his face very well.
"Well," I said, "see you in the morning."
"I'm going away in the morning."
"Oh, yes," I said.
http://www.en8848.com.cnI went out. Cohn was standing in the door of the room.
"Are you all right, Jake?" he asked.
"Oh, yes," I said. "I'm all right."
I could not find the bathroom. After a while I found it. There was a deep stone tub. I turned on the taps and the
water would not run. I sat down on the edge of the bath-tub. When I got up to go I found I had taken off my shoes. I
hunted for them and found them and carried them down-stairs. I found my room and went inside and undressed and
got into bed.
I woke with a headache and the noise of the bands going by in the street. I remembered I had promised to take
Bill's friend Edna to see the bulls go through the street and into the ring. I dressed and went down-stairs and out into
the cold early morning. People were crossing the square, hurrying toward the bull-ring. Across the square were the
two lines of men in front of the ticket-booths. They were still waiting for the tickets to go on sale at seven o'clock. I
hurried across the street to the café. The waiter told me that my friends had been there and gone.
"How many were they?"
"Two gentlemen and a lady."
That was all right. Bill and Mike were with Edna. She had been afraid last night they would pass out. That was
why I was to be sure to take her. I drank the coffee and hurried with the other people toward the bull-ring. I was not
groggy now. There was only a bad headache. Everything looked sharp and clear, and the town smelt of the early
morning.
The stretch of ground from the edge of the town to the bull-ring was muddy. There was a crowd all along the
fence that led to the ring, and the outside balconies and the top of the bull-ring were solid with people. I heard the
rocket and I knew I could not get into the ring in time to see the bulls come in, so I shoved through the crowd to the
fence. I was pushed close against the planks of the fence. Between the two fences of the runway the police were
clearing the crowd along. They walked or trotted on into the bull-ring. Then people commenced to come running. A
drunk slipped and fell. Two policemen grabbed him and rushed him over to the fence. The crowd were running fast
now. There was a great shout from the crowd, and putting my head through between the boards I saw the bulls just
coming out of the street into the long running pen. They were going fast and gaining on the crowd. Just then another
drunk started out from the fence with a blouse in his hands. He wanted to do capework with the bulls. The two
policemen tore out, collared him, one hit him with a club, and they dragged him against the fence and stood
flattened out against the fence as the last of the crowd and the bulls went by. There were so many people running
ahead of the bulls that the mass thickened and slowed up going through the gate into the ring, and as the bulls
passed, galloping together, heavy, muddy-sided, horns swinging, one shot ahead, caught a man in the running crowd
in the back and lifted him in the air. Both the man's arms were by his sides, his head went back as the horn went in,
and the bull lifted him and then dropped him. The bull picked another man running in front, but the man
disappeared into the crowd, and the crowd was through the gate and into the ring with the bulls behind them. The
red door of the ring went shut, the crowd on the outside balconies of the bull-ring were pressing through to the
inside, there was a shout, then another shout.
The man who had been gored lay face down in the trampled mud. People climbed over the fence, and I could
not see the man because the crowd was so thick around him. From inside the ring came the shouts. Each shout
meant a charge by some bull into the crowd. You could tell by the degree of intensity in the shout how bad a thing it
was that was happening. Then the rocket went up that meant the steers had gotten the bulls out of the ring and into
the corrals. I left the fence and started back toward the town.
http://www.en8848.com.cnBack in the town I went to the café to have a second coffee and some buttered toast. The waiters were
sweeping out the café and mopping off the tables. One came over and took my order.
"Anything happen at the encierro?"
"I didn't see it all. One man was badly cogido."
"Where?"
"Here." I put one hand on the small of my back and the other on my chest, where it looked as though the horn
must have come through. The waiter nodded his head and swept the crumbs from the table with his cloth.
"Badly cogido," he said. "All for sport. All for pleasure."
He went away and came back with the long-handled coffee and milk pots. He poured the milk and coffee. It
came out of the long spouts in two streams into the big cup. The waiter nodded his head.
"Badly cogido through the back," he said. He put the pots down on the table and sat down in the chair at the
table. "A big horn wound. All for fun. Just for fun. What do you think of that?"
"I don't know."
"That's it. All for fun. Fun, you understand."
"You're not an aficionado?"
"Me? What are bulls? Animals. Brute animals." He stood up and put his hand on the small of his back. "Right
through the back. A cornada right through the back. For fun--you understand."
He shook his head and walked away, carrying the coffee-pots. Two men were going by in the street. The
waiter shouted to them. They were grave-looking. One shook his head. "Muerto!" he called.
The waiter nodded his head. The two men went on. They were on some errand. The waiter came over to my
table.
"You hear? Muerto. Dead. He's dead. With a horn through him. All for morning fun. Es muy flamenco."
"It's bad."
"Not for me," the waiter said. "No fun in that for me."
Later in the day we learned that the man who was killed was named Vicente Girones, and came from near
Tafalla. The next day in the paper we read that he was twenty-eight years old, and had a farm, a wife, and two
children. He had continued to come to the fiesta each year after he was married. The next day his wife came in from
Tafalla to be with the body, and the day after there was a service in the chapel of San Fermin, and the coffin was
carried to the railway-station by members of the dancing and drinking society of Tafalla. The drums marched ahead,
and there was music on the fifes, and behind the men who carried the coffin walked the wife and two children.. . .
Behind them marched all the members of the dancing and drinking societies of Pamplona, Estella, Tafalla, and
Sanguesa who could stay over for the funeral. The coffin was loaded into the baggage-car of the train, and the
widow and the two children rode, sitting, all three together, in an open third-class railwaycarriage. The train started
with a jerk, and then ran smoothly, going down grade around the edge of the plateau and out into the fields of grain
that blew in the wind on the plain on the way to Tafalla.
The bull who killed Vicente Girones was named Bocanegra, was Number 118 of the bull-breeding
establishment of Sanchez Taberno, and was killed by Pedro Romero as the third bull of that same afternoon. His ear
was cut by popular acclamation and given to Pedro Romero, who, in turn, gave it to Brett, who wrapped it in a
handkerchief belonging to myself, and left both ear and handkerchief, along with a number of Muratti
cigarette-stubs, shoved far back in the drawer of the bed-table that stood beside her bed in the Hotel Montoya, in
Pamplona.
http://www.en8848.com.cnBack in the hotel, the night watchman was sitting on a bench inside the door. He had been there all night and
was very sleepy. He stood up as I came in. Three of the waitresses came in at the same time. They had been to the
morning show at the bull-ring. They went upstairs laughing. I followed them up-stairs and went into my room. I
took off my shoes and lay down on the bed. The window was open onto the balcony and the sunlight was bright in
the room. I did not feel sleepy. It must have been half past three o'clock when I had gone to bed and the bands had
waked me at six. My jaw was sore on both sides. I felt it with my thumb and fingers. That damn Cohn. He should
have hit somebody the first time he was insulted, and then gone away. He was so sure that Brett loved him. He was
going to stay, and true love would conquer all. Some one knocked on the door.
"Come in."
It was Bill and Mike. They sat down on the bed.
"Some encierro," Bill said. "Some encierro."
"I say, weren't you there?" Mike asked. "Ring for some beer, Bill."
"What a morning!" Bill said. He mopped off his face. "My God! what a morning! And here's old Jake. Old
Jake, the human punching-bag."
"What happened inside?"
"Good God!" Bill said, "what happened, Mike?"
"There were these bulls coming in," Mike said. "Just ahead of them was the crowd, and some chap tripped and
brought the whole lot of them down."
"And the bulls all came in right over them," Bill said.
"I heard them yell."
"That was Edna," Bill said.
"Chaps kept coming out and waving their shirts."
"One bull went along the barrera and hooked everybody over."
"They took about twenty chaps to the infirmary," Mike said.
"What a morning!" Bill said. "The damn police kept arresting chaps that wanted to go and commit suicide
with the bulls."
"The steers took them in, in the end," Mike said.
"It took about an hour."
"It was really about a quarter of an houi" Mike objected.
"Oh, go to hell," Bill said. "You've been in the war. It was two hours and a half for me."
"Where's that beer?" Mike asked.
"What did you do with the lovely Edna?"
"We took her home just now. She's gone to bed."
"How did she like it?"
"Fine. We told her it was just like that every morning."
"She was impressed," Mike said.
"She wanted us to go down in the ring, too," Bill said. "She likes action."
"I said it wouldn't be fair to my creditors," Mike said.
"What a morning," Bill said. "And what a night!"
"How's your jaw, Jake?" Mike asked.
"Sore," I said.
Bill laughed.
"Why didn't you hit him with a chair?"
"You can talk," Mike said. "He'd have knocked you out, too. I never saw him hit me. I rather think I saw him
http://www.en8848.com.cnjust before, and then quite suddenly I was sitting down in the street, and Jake was lying under a table."
"Where did he go afterward?" I asked.
"Here she is," Mike said. "Here's the beautiful lady with the beer."
The chambermaid put the tray with the beer-bottles and glasses down on the table.
"Now bring up three more bottles," Mike said.
"Where did Cohn go after he hit me?" I asked Bill.
"Don't you know about that?" Mike was opening a beer-bottle. He poured the beer into one of the glasses,
holding the glass close to the bottle.
"Really?" Bill asked.
"Why he went in and found Brett and the bull-fighter chap in the bull-fighter's room, and then he massacred
the poor, bloody bull-fighter."
"No."
"Yes."
"What a night!" Bill said.
"He nearly killed the poor, bloody bull-fighter. Then Cohn wanted to take Brett away. Wanted to make an
honest woman of her, I imagine. Damned touching scene."
He took a long drink of the beer.
"He is an ass."
"What happened?"
"Brett gave him what for. She told him off. I think she was rather good."
"I'll bet she was," Bill said.
"Then Cohn broke down and cried, and wanted to shake hands with the bull-fighter fellow. He wanted to
shake hands with Brett, too."
"I know. He shook hands with me."
"Did he? Well, they weren't having any of it. The bull-fighter fellow was rather good. He didn't say much, but
he kept getting up and getting knocked down again. Cohn couldn't knock him out. It must have been damned
funny."
"Where did you hear all this?"
"Brett. I saw her this morning."
"What happened finally?"
"It seems the bull-fighter fellow was sitting on the bed. He'd been knocked down about fifteen times, and he
wanted to fight some more. Brett held him and wouldn't let him get up. He was weak, but Brett couldn't hold him,
and he got up. Then Cohn said he wouldn't hit him again. Said he couldn't do it. Said it would be wicked. So the
bull-fighter chap sort of rather staggered over to him. Cohn went back against the wall.
"'So you won't hit me?'
"'No,' said Cohn. 'I'd be ashamed to.'
"So the bull-fighter fellow hit him just as hard as he could in the face, and then sat down on the floor. He
couldn't get up, Brett said. Cohn wanted to pick him up and carry him to the bed. He said if Cohn helped him he'd
kill him, and he'd kill him anyway this morning if Cohn wasn't out of town. Cohn was crying, and Brett had told
him off, and he wanted to shake hands. I've told you that before."
"Tell the rest," Bill said.
"It seems the bull-fighter chap was sitting on the floor. He was waiting to get strength enough to get up and hit
Cohn again. Brett wasn't having any shaking hands, and Cohn was crying and telling her how much he loved her,
and she was telling him not to be a ruddy ass. Then Cohn leaned down to shake hands with the bull-fighter fellow.
http://www.en8848.com.cnNo hard feelings, you know. All for forgiveness. And the bull-fighter chap hit him in the face again."
"That's quite a kid," Bill said.
"He ruined Cohn," Mike said. "You know I don't think Cohn will ever want to knock people about again."
"When did you see Brett?"
"This morning. She came in to get some things. She's looking after this Romero lad."
He poured out another bottle of beer.
"Brett's rather cut up. But she loves looking after people. That's how we came to go off together. She was
looking after me."
"I know," I said.
"I'm rather drunk," Mike said. "I think I'll stay rather drunk. This is all awfully amusing, but it's not too
pleasant. It's not too pleasant for me."
He drank off the beer.
"I gave Brett what for, you know. I said if she would go about with Jews and bull-fighters and such people,
she must expect trouble." He leaned forward. "I say, Jake, do you mind if I drink that bottle of yours? She'll bring
you another one."
"Please," I said. "I wasn't drinking it, anyway."
Mike started to open the bottle. "Would you mind opening it?" I pressed up the wire fastener and poured it for
him.
"You know," Mike went on, "Brett was rather good. She's always rather good. I gave her a fearful hiding about
Jews and bullfighters, and all those sort of people, and do you know what she said: 'Yes. I've had such a hell of a
happy life with the British aristocracy!'
He took a drink.
"That was rather good. Ashley, chap she got the title from, was a sailor, you know. Ninth baronet. When he
came home he wouldn't sleep in a bed. Always made Brett sleep on the floor. Finally, when he got really bad, he
used to tell her he'd kill her. Always slept with a loaded service revolver. Brett used to take the shells out when he'd
gone to sleep. She hasn't had an absolutely happy life, Brett. Damned shame, too. She enjoys things so."
He stood up. His hand was shaky.
"I'm going in the room. Try and get a little sleep."
He smiled.
"We go too long without sleep in these fiestas. I'm going to start now and get plenty of sleep. Damn bad thing
not to get sleep. Makes you frightfully nervy."
"We'll see you at noon at the Iruña," Bill said.
Mike went out the door. We heard him in the next room.
He rang the bell and the chambermaid came and knocked at the door.
"Bring up half a dozen bottles of beer and a bottle of Fundador," Mike told her.
"Si, Señorito."
"I'm going to bed," Bill said. "Poor old Mike. I had a hell of a row about him last night."
"Where? At that Milano place?"
"Yes. There was a fellow there that had helped pay Brett and Mike out of Cannes, once. He was damned
nasty."
"I know the story."
"I didn't. Nobody ought to have a right to say things about Mike."
"That's what makes it bad."
"They oughtn't to have any right. I wish to hell they didn't have any right. I'm going to bed."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Was anybody killed in the ring?"
"I don't think so. Just badly hurt."
"A man was killed outside in the runway."
"Was there?" said Bill.
http://www.en8848.com.cn18
At noon we were all at the café. It was crowded. We were eating shrimps and drinking beer. The town was
crowded. Every street was full. Big motor-cars from Biarritz and San Sebastian kept driving up and parking around
the square. They brought people for the bullfight. Sight-seeing cars came up, too. There was one with twentyfive
Englishwomen in it. They sat in the big, white car and looked through their glasses at the fiesta. The dancers were
all quite drunk. It was the last day of the fiesta.
The fiesta was solid and unbroken, but the motor-cars and tourist-cars made little islands of onlookers. When
the cars emptied, the onlookers were absorbed into the crowd. You did not see them again except as sport clothes,
odd-looking at a table among the closely packed peasants in black smocks. The fiesta absorbed even the Biarritz
English so that you did not see them unless you passed close to a table. All the time there was music in the street.
The drums kept on pounding and the pipes were going. Inside the cafés men with their hands gripping the table, or
on each other's shoulders, were singing the hard-voiced singing.
"Here comes Brett," Bill said.
I looked and saw her coming through the crowd in the square, walking, her head up, as though the fiesta were
being staged in her honor, and she found it pleasant and amusing.
"Hello, you chaps!" she said. "I say, I _have_ a thirst."
"Get another big beer," Bill said to the waiter.
"Shrimps?"
"Is Cohn gone?" Brett asked.
"Yes," Bill said. "He hired a car."
The beer came. Brett started to lift the glass mug and her hand shook. She saw it and smiled, and leaned
forward and took a long sip.
"Good beer."
"Very good," I said. I was nervous about Mike. I did not think he had slept. He must have been drinking all the
time, but he seemed to be under control.
"I heard Cohn had hurt you, Jake," Brett said.
"No. Knocked me out. That was all."
"I say, he did hurt Pedro Romero," Brett said. "He hurt him most badly."
"How is he?"
"He'll be all right. He won't go out of the room."
"Does he look badly?"
"Very. He was really hurt. I told him I wanted to pop out and see you chaps for a minute."
"Is he going to fight?"
"Rather. I'm going with you, if you don't mind."
"How's your boy friend?" Mike asked. He had not listened to anything that Brett had said.
"Brett's got a bull-fighter," he said. "She had a Jew named Cohn, but he turned out badly."
Brett stood up.
"I am not going to listen to that sort of rot from you, Michael."
"How's your boy friend?"
"Damned well," Brett said. "Watch him this afternoon."
"Brett's got a bull-fighter," Mike said. "A beautiful, bloody bullfighter."
"Would you mind walking over with me? I want to talk to you, Jake."
"Tell him all about your bull-fighter," Mike said. "Oh, to hell with your bull-fighter!" He tipped the table so
http://www.en8848.com.cnthat all the beers and the dIsh of shrimps went over in a crash.
"Come on," Brett said. "Let's get out of this."
In the crowd crossing the square I said: "How is it?"
"I'm not going to see him after lunch until the fight. His people come in and dress him. They're very angry
about me, he says."
Brett was radiant. She was happy. The sun was out and the day was bright.
"I feel altogether changed," Brett said. "You've no idea, Jake."
"Anything you want me to do?"
"No, just go to the fight with me."
"We'll see you at lunch?"
"No. I'm eating with him."
We were standing under the arcade at the door of the hotel. They were carrying tables out and setting them up
under the arcade.
"Want to take a turn out to the park?" Brett asked. "I don't want to go up yet. I fancy he's sleeping."
We walked along past the theatre and out of the square and along through the barracks of the fair, moving with
the crowd between the lines of booths. We came out on a cross-street that led to the Paseo de Sarasate. We could see
the crowd walking there, all the fashionably dressed people. They were making the turn at the upper end of the park.
"Don't let's go there," Brett said. "I don't want staring at just now."
We stood in the sunlight. It was hot and good after the rain and the clouds from the sea.
"I hope the wind goes down," Brett said. "It's very bad for him."
"So do I."
"He says the bulls are all right."
"They're good."
"Is that San Fermin's?"
Brett looked at the yellow wall of the chapel.
"Yes. Where the show started on Sunday."
"Let's go in. Do you mind? I'd rather like to pray a little for him or something."
We went in through the heavy leather door that moved very lightly. It was dark inside. Many people were
praying. You saw them as your eyes adjusted themselves to the half-light. We knelt at one of the long wooden
benches. After a little I felt Brett stiffen beside me, and saw she was looking straight ahead.
"Come on," she whispered throatily. "Let's get out of here. Makes me damned nervous."
Outside in the hot brightness of the Street Brett looked up at the tree-tops in the wind. The praying had not
been much of a success.
"Don't know why I get so nervy in church," Brett said. "Never does me any good."
We walked along.
"I'm damned bad for a religious atmosphere," Brett said. "I've the wrong type of face.
"You know," Brett said, "I'm not worried about him at all. I just feel happy about him."
"Good."
"I wish the wind would drop, though."
"It's liable to go down by five o'clock."
"Let's hope."
"You might pray," I laughed.
"Never does me any good. I've never gotten anything I prayed for. Have you?"
"Oh, yes."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Oh, rot," said Brett. "Maybe it works for some people, though you don't look very religious, Jake."
"I'm pretty religious."
"Oh, rot," said Brett. "Don't start proselyting to-day. To-day's going to be bad enough as it is."
It was the first time I had seen her in the old happy, careless way since before she went off with Cohn. We
were back again in front of the hotel. All the tables were set now, and already several were filled with people eating.
"Do look after Mike," Brett said. "Don't let him get too bad."
"Your frients haff gone up-stairs," the German maître d'hôtel said in English. He was a continual eavesdropper.
Brett turned to him:
"Thank you, so much. Have you anything else to say?"
"No, _ma'am_."
"Good," said Brett.
"Save us a table for three," I said to the German. He smiled his dirty little pink-and-white smile.
"Iss madam eating here?"
"No," Brett said.
"Den I think a tabul for two will be enuff."
"Don't talk to him," Brett said. "Mike must have been in bad shape," she said on the stairs. We passed
Montoya on the stairs. He bowed and did not smile.
"I'll see you at the café," Brett said. "Thank you, so much,
Jake."
We had stopped at the floor our rooms were on. She went straight down the hail and into Romero's room. She
did not knock. She simply opened the door, went in, and closed it behind her.
I stood in front of the door of Mike's room and knocked. There was no answer. I tried the knob and it opened.
Inside the room was in great disorder. All the bags were opened and clothing was strewn around. There were empty
bottles beside the bed. Mike lay on the bed looking like a death mask of himself. He opened his eyes and looked at
me.
"Hello, Jake," he said very slowly. "I'm getting a lit tle sleep. I've want ed a lit tle sleep for a long time."
"Let me cover you over."
"No. I'm quite warm."
"Don't go. I have n't got ten to sleep yet."
"You'll sleep, Mike. Don't worry, boy."
"Brett's got a bull-fighter," Mike said. "But her Jew has gone away."
He turned his head and looked at me.
"Damned good thing, what?"
"Yes. Now go to sleep, Mike. You ought to get some sleep."
"I'm just start ing. I'm go ing to get a lit tie sleep."
He shut his eyes. I went Out of the room and turned the door to quietly. Bill was in my room reading the
paper.
"See Mike?"
"Yes."
"Let's go and eat."
"I won't eat down-stairs with that German head waiter. He was damned snotty when I was getting Mike
up-stairs."
"He was snotty to us, too."
"Let's go out and eat in the town."
We went down the stairs. On the stairs we passed a girl coming up with a covered tray.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"There goes Brett's lunch," Bill said.
"And the kid's," I said.
Outside on the terrace under the arcade the German head waiter came up. His red cheeks were shiny. He was
being polite.
"I haff a tabul for two for you gentlemen," he said.
"Go sit at it," Bill said. We went on out across the street.
We ate at a restaurant in a side street off the square. They were all men eating in the restaurant. It was full of
smoke and drinking and singing. The food was good and so was the wine. We did not talk much. Afterward we went
to the café and watched the fiesta come to the boiling-point. Brett came over soon after lunch. She said she had
looked in the room and that Mike was asleep.
When the fiesta boiled over and toward the bull-ring we went with the crowd. Brett sat at the ringside between
Bill and me. Directly below us was the callejon, the passageway between the stands and the red fence of the barrera.
Behind us the concrete stands filled solidly. Out in front, beyond the red fence, the sand of the ring was
smooth-rolled and yellow. It looked a little heavy from the rain, but it was dry in the sun and firm and smooth. The
swordhandlers and bull-ring servants came down the callejon carrying on their shoulders the wicker baskets of
fighting capes and muletas. They were bloodstained and compactly folded and packed in the baskets. The
sword-handlers opened the heavy leather sword-cases so the red wrapped hilts of the sheaf of swords showed as the
leather case leaned against the fence. They unfolded the dark-stained red flannel of the muletas and fixed batons in
them to spread the stuff and give the matador something to hold. Brett watched it all. She was absorbed in the
professional details.
"He's his name stencilled on all the capes and muletas," she said. "Why do they call them muletas?"
"I don't know."
"I wonder if they ever launder them."
"I don't think so. It might spoil the color."
"The blood must stiffen them," Bill said.
"Funny," Brett said. "How one doesn't mind the blood."
Below in the narrow passage of the callejon the sword-handlers arranged everything. All the seats were full.
Above, all the boxes were full. There was not an empty seat except in the President's box. When he came in the fight
would start. Across the smooth sand, in the high doorway that led into the corrals, the bull-fighters were standing,
their arms furled in their capes, talking, waiting for the signal to march in across the arena. Brett was watching them
with the glasses.
"Here, would you like to look?"
I looked through the glasses and saw the three matadors. Romero was in the centre, Belmonte on his left,
Marcial on his right. Back of them were their people, and behind the banderilleros, back in the passageway and in
the open space of the corral, I saw the picadors. Romero was wearing a black suit. His tricornered hat was low down
over his eyes. I could not see his face clearly under the hat, but it looked badly marked. He was looking straight
ahead. Marcial was smoking a cigarette guardedly, holding it in his hand. Beimonte looked ahead, his face wan and
yellow, his long wolf jaw out. He was looking at nothing. Neither he nor Romero seemed to have anything in
common with the others. They were all alone. The President came in; there was handclapping above us in the grand
stand, and I handed the glasses to Brett. There was applause. The music started. Brett looked through the glasses.
"Here, take them," she said.
Through the glasses I saw Belmonte speak to Romero. Marcial straightened up and dropped his cigarette, and,
looking straight ahead, their heads back, their free arms swinging, the three matadors walked out. Behind them
came all the procession, opening out, all striding in step, all the capes furled, everybody with free arms swinging,
http://www.en8848.com.cnand behind rode the picadors, their pics rising like lances. Behind all came the two trains of mules and the bull-ring
servants. The matadors bowed, holding their hats on, before the President's box, and then came over to the barrera
beiow us. Pedro Romero took off his heavy gold-brocaded cape and handed it over the fence to his sword-handler.
He said something to the sword-handler. Close below us we saw Romero's lips were puffed, both eyes were
discolored. His face was discolored and swollen. The sword-handler took the cape, looked up at Brett, and came
over to us and handed up the cape.
"Spread it out in front of you," I said.
Brett leaned forward. The cape was heavy and smoothly stiff with gold. The sword-handler looked back,
shook his head, and said something. A man beside me leaned over toward Brett.
"He doesn't want you to spread it," he said. "You should fold it and keep it in your lap."
Brett folded the heavy cape.
Romero did not look up at us. He was speaking to Belmonte. Belmonte had sent his formal cape over to some
friends. He looked across at them and smiled, his wolf smile that was only with the mouth. Romero leaned over the
barrera and asked for the water-jug. The sword-handler brought it and Romero poured water over the percale of his
fighting-cape, and then scuffed the lower folds in the sand with his slippered foot.
"What's that for?" Brett asked.
"To give it weight in the wind."
"His face looks bad," Bill said.
"He feels very badly," Brett said. "He should be in bed."
The first bull was Belmonte's. Belmonte was very good. But because he got thirty thousand pesetas and people
had stayed in line all night to buy tickets to see him, the crowd demanded that he should be more than very good.
Belmonte's great attraction is working close to the bull. In bull-fighting they speak of the terrain of the bull and the
terrain of the bull-fighter. As long as a bull-fighter stays in his own terrain he is comparatively safe. Each time he
enters into the terrain of the bull he is in great danger. Belmonte, in his best days, worked always in the terrain of the
bull. This way he gave the sensation of coming tragedy. People went to the corrida to see Belmonte, to be given
tragic sensations, and perhaps to see the death of Belmonte. Fifteen years ago they said if you wanted to see
Belmonte you should go quickly, while he was still alive. Since then he has killed more than a thousand bulls. When
he retired the legend grew up about how his bull-fighting had been, and when he came out of retirement the public
were disappointed because no real man could work as close to the bulls as Belmonte was supposed to have done,
not, of course, even Belmonte.
Also Belmonte imposed conditions and insisted that his bulls should not be too large, nor too dangerously
armed with horns, and so the element that was necessary to give the sensation of tragedy was not there, and the
public, who wanted three times as much from Belmonte, who was sick with a fistula, as Belmonte had ever been
able to give, felt defrauded and cheated, and Belmonte's jaw came further out in contempt, and his face turned
yellower, and he moved with greater difficulty as his pain increased, and finally the crowd were actively against him,
and he was utterly contemptuous and indifferent. He had meant to have a great afternoon, and instead it was an
afternoon of sneers, shouted insults, and finally a volley of cushions and pieces of bread and vegetables, thrown
down at him in the plaza where he had had his greatest triumphs. His jaw only went further out. Sometimes he
turned to smile that toothed, longjawed, lipless smile when he was called something particularly insulting, and
always the pain that any movement produced grew stronger and stronger, until finally his yellow face was
parchment color, and after his second bull was dead and the throwing of bread and cushions was over, after he had
saluted the President with the same wolf-jawed smile and contemptuous eyes, and handed his sword over the barrera
to be wiped, and put back in its case, he passed through into the callejon and leaned on the barrera below us, his
head on his arms, not seeing, not hearing anything, only going through his pain. When he looked up, finally, he
http://www.en8848.com.cnasked for a drink of water. He swallowed a little, rinsed his mouth, spat the water, took his cape, and went back into
the ring.
Because they were against Belmonte the public were for Romero. From the moment he left the barrera and
went toward the bull they applauded him. Belmonte watched Romero, too, watched him always without seeming to.
He paid no attention to Marcial. Marcial was the sort of thing he knew all about. He had come out of retirement to
compete with Marcial, knowing it was a competition gained in advance. He had expected to compete with Marcial
and the other stars of the decadence of bull-fighting, and he knew that the sincerity of his own bull-fighting would
be so set off by the false aesthetics of the bull-fighters of the decadent period that he would only have to be in the
ring. His return from retirement had been spoiled by Romero. Romero did always, smoothly, calmly, and beautifully,
what he, Belmonte, could only bring himself to do now sometimes. The crowd felt it, even the people from Biarritz,
even the American ambassador saw it, finally. It was a competition that Belmonte would not enter because it would
lead only to a bad horn wound or death. Belmonte was no longer well enough. He no longer had his greatest
moments in the bull-ring. He was not sure that there were any great moments. Things were not the same and now
life only came in flashes. He had flashes of the old greatness with his bulls, but they were not of value because he
had discounted them in advance when he had picked the bulls out for their safety, getting out of a motor and leaning
on a fence, looking over at the herd on the ranch of his friend the bull-breeder. So he had two small, manageable
bulls withoui much horns, and when he felt the greatness again coming, just a little of it through the pain that was
always with him, it had been discounted and sold in advance, and it did not give him a good feeling. It was the
greatness, but it did not make bull-fighting wonderful to him any more.
Pedro Romero had the greatness. He loved bull-fighting, and I think he loved the bulls, and I think he loved
Brett. Everything of which he could control the locality he did in front of her all that afternoon. Never once did he
look up. He made it stronger that way, and did it for himself, too, as well as for her. Because he did not look up to
ask if it pleased he did it all for himself inside, and it strengthened him, and yet he did it for her, too. But he did not
do it for her at any loss to himself. He gained by it all through the afternoon.
His first "quite" was directly below us. The three matadors take the bull in turn after each charge he makes at a
picador. Be!monte was the first. Marcial was the second. Then came Romero. The three of them were standing at
the left of the horse. The picador, his hat down over his eyes, the shaft of his pic angling sharply toward the bull,
kicked in the spurs and held them and with the reins in his left hand walked the horse forward toward the bull. The
bull was watching. Seemingly he watched the white horse, but really he watched the triangular steel point of the pic.
Romero, watching, saw the bull start to turn his head. He did not want to charge. Romero flicked his cape so the
color caught the bull's eye. The bull charged with the reflex, charged, and found not the flash of color but a white
horse, and a man leaned far over the horse, shot the steel point of the long hickory shaft into the hump of muscle on
the bull's shoulder, and pulled his horse sideways as he pivoted on the pic, making a wound, enforcing the iron into
the bull's shoulder, making him bleed for Belmonte.
The bull did not insist under the iron. He did not really want to get at the horse. He turned and the group broke
apart and Romero was taking him out with his cape. He took him out softly and smoothly, and then stopped and,
standing squarely in front of the bull, offered him the cape. The bull's tail went up and he charged, and Romero
moved his arms ahead of the bull, wheeling, his feet firmed. The dampened, mud-weighted cape swung open and
full as a sail fills, and Romero pivoted with it just ahead of the bull. At the end of the pass they were facing each
other again. Romero smiled. The bull wanted it again, and Romero's cape filled again, this time on the other side.
Each time he let the bull pass so close that the man and the bull and the cape that filled and pivoted ahead of the bull
were all one sharply etched mass. It was all so slow and so controlled. It was as though he were rocking the bull to
sleep. He made four veronicas like that, and finished with a half-veronica that turned his back on the bull and came
away toward the applause, his hand on his hip, his cape on his arm, and the bull watching his back going away.
http://www.en8848.com.cnIn his own bulls he was perfect. His first bull did not see well. After the first two passes with the cape Romero
knew exactly how bad the vision was impaired. He worked accordingly. It was not brilliant bull-fighting. It was
only perfect bull-fighting. The crowd wanted the bull changed. They made a great row. Nothing very fine could
happen with a bull that could not see the lures, but the President would not order him replaced.
"Why don't they change him?" Brett asked.
"They've paid for him. They don't want to lose their money."
"It's hardly fair to Romero."
"Watch how he handles a bull that can't see the color."
"It's the sort of thing I don't like to see."
It was not nice to watch if you cared anything about the person who was doing it. With the bull who could not
see the colors of the capes, or the scarlet flannel of the muleta, Romero had to make the bull consent with his body.
He had to get so close that the bull saw his body, and would start for it, and then shift the bull's charge to the flannel
and finish out the pass in the classic manner. The Biarritz crowd did not like it. They thought Romero was afraid,
and that was why he gave that little sidestep each time as he transferred the bull's charge from his own body to the
flannel. They preferred Belmonte's imitation of himself or Marcial's imitation of Belmonte. There were three of
them in the row behind us.
"What's he afraid of the bull for? The bull's so dumb he only goes after the cloth."
"He's just a young bull-fighter. He hasn't learned it yet."
"But I thought he was fine with the cape before."
"Probably he's nervous now."
Out in the centre of the ring, all alone, Romero was going on with the same thing, getting so close that the bull
could see him plainly, offering the body, offering it again a little closer, the bull watching dully, then so close that
the bull thought he had him, offering again and finally drawing the charge and then, just before the horns came,
giving the bull the red cloth to follow with that little, almost imperceptible, jerk that so offended the critical
judgment of the Biarritz bull-fight experts.
"He's going to kill now," I said to Brett. "The bull's still strong. He wouldn't wear himself out."
Out in the centre of the ring Romero profiled in front of the bull, drew the sword out from the folds of the
muleta, rose on his toes, and sighted along the blade. The bull charged as Romero charged. Romero's left hand
dropped the muleta over the bull's muzzle to blind him, his left shoulder went forward between the horns as the
sword went in, and for just an instant he and the bull were one, Romero way out over the bull, the right arm
extended high up to where the hilt of the sword had gone in between the bull's shoulders. Then the figure was
broken. There was a little jolt as Romero came clear, and then he was standing, one hand up, facing the bull, his
shirt ripped out from under his sleeve, the white blowing in the wind, and the bull, the red sword hilt tight between
his shoulders, his head going down and his legs settling.
"There he goes," Bill said.
Romero was close enough so the bull could see him. His hand still up, he spoke to the bull. The bull gathered
himself, then his head went forward and he went over slowly, then all over, suddenly, four feet in the air.
They handed the sword to Romero, and carrying it blade down, the muleta in his other hand, he walked over
to in front of the President's box, bowed, straightened, and came over to the barrera and handed over the sword and
muleta.
"Bad one," said the sword-handler.
"He made me sweat," said Romero. He wiped off his face. The sword-handler handed him the water-jug.
Romero wiped his lips. It hurt him to drink Out of the jug. He did not look up at us.
Marcial had a big day. They were still applauding him when Romero's last bull came in. It was the bull that
http://www.en8848.com.cnhad sprinted out and killed the man in the morning running.
During Romero's first bull his hurt face had been very noticeable. Everything he did showed it. All the
concentration of the awkwardly delicate working with the bull that could not see well brought it out. The fight with
Cohn had not touched his spirit but his face had been smashed and his body hurt. He was wiping all that out now.
Each thing that he did with this bull wiped that out a little cleaner. It was a good bull, a big bull, and with horns, and
it turned and recharged easily and surely. He was what Romero wanted in bulls.
When he had finished his work with the muleta and was ready to kill, the crowd made him go on. They did not
want the bull killed yet, they did not want it to be over. Romero went on. It was like a course in bull-fighting. All the
passes he linked up, all completed, all slow, templed and smooth. There were no tricks and no mystifications. There
was no brusqueness. And each pass as it reached the summit gave you a sudden ache inside. The crowd did not want
it ever to be finished.
The bull was squared on all four feet to be killed, and Romero killed directly below us. He killed not as he had
been forced to by the last bull, but as he wanted to. He profiled directly in front of the bull, drew the sword out of
the folds of the muleta and sighted along the blade. The bull watched him. Romero spoke to the bull and tapped one
of his feet. The bull charged and Romero waited for the charge, the muleta held low, sighting along the blade, his
feet firm. Then without taking a step forward, he became one with the bull, the sword was in high between the
shoulders, the bull had followed the low-swung flannel, that disappeared as Romero lurched clear to the left, and it
was over. The bull tried to go forward, his legs commenced to settle, he swung from side to side, hesitated, then
went down on his knees, and Romero's older brother leaned forward behind him and drove a short knife into the
bull's neck at the base of the horns. The first time he missed. He drove the knife in again, and the bull went over,
twitching and rigid. Romero's brother, holding the bull's horn in one hand, the knife in the other, looked up at the
President's box. Handkerchiefs were waving all over the bullring. The President looked down from the box and
waved his handkerchief. The brother cut the notched black ear from the dead bull and trotted over with it to Romero.
The bull lay heavy and black on the sand, his tongue out. Boys were running toward him from all parts of the arena,
making a little circle around him. They were starting to dance around the bull.
Romero took the ear from his brother and held it up toward the President. The President bowed and Romero,
running to get ahead of the crowd, came toward us. He leaned up against the barrera and gave the ear to Brett. He
nodded his head and smiled. The crowd were all about him. Brett held down the cape.
"You liked it?" Romero called.
Brett did not say anything. They looked at each other and smiled. Brett had the ear in her hand.
"Don't get bloody," Romero said, and grinned. The crowd wanted him. Several boys shouted at Brett. The
crowd was the boys, the dancers, and the drunks. Romero turned and tried to get through the crowd. They were all
around him trying to lift him and put him on their shoulders. He fought and twisted away, and started running, in the
midst of them, toward the exit. He did not want to be carried on people's shoulders. But they held him and lifted him.
It was uncomfortable and his legs were spraddled and his body was very sore. They were lifting him and all running
toward the gate. He had his hand on somebody's shoulder. He looked around at us apologetically. The crowd,
running, went out the gate with him.
We all three went back to the hotel. Brett went upstairs. Bill and I sat in the down-stairs dining-room and ate
some hard-boiled eggs and drank several bottles of beer. Belmonte came down in his street clothes with his manager
and two other men. They sat at the next table and ate. Belmonte ate very little. They were leaving on the seven
o'clock train for Barcelona. Belmonte wore a blue-striped shirt and a dark suit, and ate soft-boiled eggs. The others
ate a big meal. Belmonte did not talk. He only answered questions.
Bill was tired after the bull-fight. So was I. We both took a bullfight very hard. We sat and ate the eggs and I
watched Belmonte and the people at his table. The men with him were tough-looking and businesslike.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Come on over to the café," Bill said. "I want an absinthe."
It was the last day of the fiesta. Outside it was beginning to be cloudy again. The square was full of people and
the fireworks experts were making up their set pieces for the night and covering them over with beech branches.
Boys were watching. We passed stands of rockets with long bamboo stems. Outside the café there was a great crowd.
The music and the dancing were going on. The giants and the dwarfs were passing.
"Where's Edna?" I asked Bill.
"I don't know."
We watched the beginning of the evening of the last night of the fiesta. The absinthe made everything seem
better. I drank it without sugar in the dripping glass, and it was pleasantly bitter.
"I feel sorry about Cohn," Bill said. "He had an awful time."
"Oh, to hell with Cohn," I said.
"Where do you suppose he went?"
"Up to Paris."
"What do you suppose he'll do?"
"Oh, to hell with him."
"What do you suppose he'll do?"
"Pick up with his old girl, probably."
"Who was his old girl?"
"Somebody named Frances."
We had another absinthe.
"When do you go back?" I asked.
"To-morrow."
After a little while Bill said: "Well, it was a swell fiesta."
"Yes," I said, "something doing all the time."
"You wouldn't believe it. It's like a wonderful nightmare."
"Sure," I said. "I'd believe anything. Including nightmares."
"What's the matter? Feel low?"
"Low as hell."
"Have another absinthe. Here, waiter! Another absinthe for this señor."
"I feel like hell," I said.
"Drink that," said Bill. "Drink it slow."
It was beginning to get dark. The fiesta was going on. I began to feel drunk but I did not feel any better.
"How do you feel?"
"I feel like hell."
"Have another?"
"It won't do any good."
"Try it. You can't tell; maybe this is the one that gets it. Hey, waiter! Another absinthe for this señor!"
I poured the water directly into it and stirred it instead of letting it drip. Bill put in a lump of ice. I stirred the
ice around with a spoon in the brownish, cloudy mixture.
"How is it?"
"Fine."
"Don't drink it fast that way. It will make you sick."
I set down the glass. I had not meant to drink it fast.
"I feel tight."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"You ought to."
"That's what you wanted, wasn't it?"
"Sure. Get tight. Get over your damn depression."
"Well, I'm tight. Is that what you want?"
"Sit down."
"I won't sit down," I said. "I'm going over to the hotel."
I was very drunk. I was drunker than I ever remembered having been. At the hotel I went up-stairs. Brett's
door was open. I put my head in the room. Mike was sitting on the bed. He waved a bottle.
"Jake," he said. "Come in, Jake."
I went in and sat down. The room was unstable unless I looked at some fixed point.
"Brett, you know. She's gone off with the bull-fighter chap."
"No."
"Yes. She looked for you to say good-bye. They went on the seven o'clock train."
"Did they?"
"Bad thing to do," Mike said. "She shouldn't have done it."
"No."
"Have a drink? Wait while I ring for some beer."
"I'm drunk," I said. "I'm going in and lie down."
"Are you blind? I was blind myself."
"Yes," I said, "I'm blind."
"Well, bung-o," Mike said. "Get some sleep, old Jake."
I went out the door and into my own room and lay on the bed. The bed went sailing off and I sat up in bed and
looked at the wall to make it stop. Outside in the square the fiesta was going on. It did not mean anything. Later Bill
and Mike came in to get me to go down and eat with them. I pretended to be asleep.
"He's asleep. Better let him alone."
"He's blind as a tick," Mike said. They went out.
I got up and went to the balcony and looked out at the dancing in the square. The world was not wheeling any
more. It was just very clear and bright, and inclined to blur at the edges. I washed, brushed my hair. I looked strange
to myself in the glass, and went down-stairs to the dining-room.
"Here he is!" said Bill. "Good old Jake! I knew you wouldn't pass out."
"Hello, you old drunk," Mike said.
"I got hungry and woke up."
"Eat some soup," Bill said.
The three of us sat at the table, and it seemed as though about six people were missing.
http://www.en8848.com.cnBOOK THREE
19
In the morning it was all over. The fiesta was finished. I woke about nine o'clock, had a bath, dressed, and
went down-stairs. The square was empty and there were no people on the streets. A few children were picking up
rocket-sticks in the square. The cafés were just opening and the waiters were carrying Out the comfortable white
wicker chairs and arranging them around the marble-topped tables in the shade of the arcade. They were sweeping
the streets and sprinkling them with a hose.
I sat in one of the wicker chairs and leaned back comfortably. The waiter was in no hurry to come. The
white-paper announcements of the unloading of the bulls and the big schedules of special trains were still up on the
pillars of the arcade. A waiter wearing a blue apron came out with a bucket of water and a cloth, and commenced to
tear down the notices, pulling the paper off in strips and washing and rubbing away the paper that stuck to the stone.
The fiesta was over.
I drank a coffee and after a while Bill came over. I watched him come walking across the square. He sat down
at the table and ordered a coffee.
"Well," he said, "it's all over."
"Yes," I said. "When do you go?"
"I don't know. We better get a car, I think. Aren't you going back to Paris?"
"No. I can stay away another week. I think I'll go to San Sebastian."
"I want to get back."
"What's Mike going to do?"
"He's going to Saint Jean de Luz."
"Let's get a car and all go as far as Bayonne. You can get the train up from there to-night."
"Good. Let's go after lunch."
"All right. I'll get the car."
We had lunch and paid the bill. Montoya did not come near us. One of the maids brought the bill. The car was
outside. The chauffeur piled and strapped the bags on top of the car and put them in beside him in the front seat and
we got in. The car went out of the square, along through the side streets, out under the trees and down the hill and
away from Pamplona. It did not seem like a very long ride. Mike had a bottle of Fundador. I only took a couple of
drinks. We came over the mountains and out of Spain and down the white roads and through the overfoliaged, wet,
green, Basque country, and finally into Bayonne. We left Bill's baggage at the station, and he bought a ticket to Paris.
His train left at seven-ten. We came out of the station. The car was standing out in front.
"What shall we do about the car?" Bill asked.
"Oh, bother the car," Mike said. "Let's just keep the car with us."
"All right," Bill said. "Where shall we go?"
"Let's go to Biarritz and have a drink."
"Old Mike the spender," Bill said.
We drove in to Biarritz and left the car outside a very Ritz place. We went into the bar and sat on high stools
and drank a whiskey and soda.
"That drink's mine," Mike said.
"Let's roll for it."
So we rolled poker dice out of a deep leather dice-cup. Bill was out first roll. Mike lost to me and handed the
http://www.en8848.com.cnbartender a hundred-franc note. The whiskeys were twelve francs apiece. We had another round and Mike lost again.
Each time he gave the bartender a good tip. In a room off the bar there was a good jazz band playing. It was a
pleasant bar. We had another round. I went out on the first roll with four kings. Bill and Mike rolled. Mike won the
first roll with four jacks. Bill won the second. On the final roll Mike had three kings and let them stay. He handed
the dice-cup to Bill. Bill rattled them and rolled, and there were three kings, an ace. and a queen.
"It's yours, Mike," Bill said. "Old Mike, the gambler."
"I'm so sorry," Mike said. "I can't get it."
"What's the matter?"
"I've no money," Mike said. "I'm stony. I've just twenty francs. Here, take twenty francs."
Bill's face sort of changed.
"I just had enough to pay Montoya. Damned lucky to have it, too."
"I'll cash you a check," Bill said.
"That's damned nice of you, but you see I can't write checks."
"What are you going to do for money?"
"Oh, some will come through. I've two weeks allowance should be here. I can live on tick at this pub in Saint
Jean."
"What do you want to do about the car?" Bill asked me. "Do you want to keep it on?"
"It doesn't make any difference. Seems sort of idiotic."
"Come on, let's have another drink," Mike said.
"Fine. This one is on me," Bill said. "Has Brett any money?" He turned to Mike.
"I shouldn't think so. She put up most of what I gave to old Montoya."
"She hasn't any money with her?" I asked.
"I shouldn't think so. She never has any money. She gets five hundred quid a year and pays three hundred and
fifty of it in interest to Jews."
"I suppose they get it at the source," said Bill.
"Quite. They're not really Jews. We just call them Jews. They're Scotsmen, I believe."
"Hasn't she any at all with her?" I asked.
"I hardly think so. She gave it all to me when she left."
"Well," Bill said, "we might as well have another drink."
"Damned good idea," Mike said. "One never gets anywhere by discussing finances."
"No," said Bill. Bill and I rolled for the next two rounds. Bill lost and paid. We went out to the car.
"Anywhere you'd like to go, Mike?" Bill asked.
"Let's take a drive. It might do my credit good. Let's drive about a little."
"Fine. I'd like to see the coast. Let's drive down toward Hendaye."
"I haven't any credit along the coast."
"You can't ever tell," said Bill.
We drove out along the coast road. There was the green of the headlands, the white, red-roofed villas, patches
of forest, and the ocean very blue with the tide out and the water curling far out along the beach. We drove through
Saint Jean de Luz and passed through villages farther down the coast. Back of the rolling country we were going
through we saw the mountains we had come over from Pamplona. The road went on ahead. Bill looked at his watch.
It was time for us to go back. He knocked on the glass and told the driver to turn around. The driver backed the car
out into the grass to turn it. In back of us were the woods, below a stretch of meadow, then the sea.
At the hotel where Mike was going to stay in Saint Jean we stopped the car and he got out. The chauffeur
carried in his bags. Mike stood by the side of the car.
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Good-bye, you chaps," Mike said. "It was a damned fine fiesta."
"So long, Mike," Bill said.
"I'll see you around," I said.
"Don't worry about money," Mike said. "You can pay for the car, Jake, and I'll send you my share."
"So long, Mike."
"So long, you chaps. You've been damned nice."
We all shook hands. We waved from the car to Mike. He stood in the road watching. We got to Bayonne just
before the train left. A porter carried Bill's bags in from the consigne. I went as far as the inner gate to the tracks.
"So long, fella," Bill said.
"So long, kid!"
"It was swell. I've had a swell time."
"Will you be in Paris?"
"No, I have to sail on the 17th. So long, fella!"
"So long, old kid!"
He went in through the gate to the train. The porter went ahead with the bags. I watched the train pull out. Bill
was at one of the windows. The window passed, the rest of the train passed, and the tracks were empty. I went
outside to the car.
"How much do we owe you?" I asked the driver. The price to Bayonne had been fixed at a hundred and fifty
pesetas.
"Two hundred pesetas."
"How much more will it be if you drive me to San Sebastian on your way back?"
"Fifty pesetas."
"Don't kid me."
"Thirty-five pesetas."
"It's not worth it," I said. "Drive me to the Hotel Panier Fleuri."
At the hotel I paid the driver and gave him a tip. The car was powdered with dust. I rubbed the rod-case
through the dust. It seemed the last thing that connected me with Spain and the fiesta. The driver put the car in gear
and went down the street. I watched it turn off to take the road to Spain. I went into the hotel and they gave me a
room. It was the same room I had slept in when Bill and Cohn and I were in Bayonne. That seemed a very long time
ago. I washed, changed my shirt, and went out in the town.
At a newspaper kiosque I bought a copy of the New York _Herald_ and sat in a café to read it. It felt strange to
be in France again. There was a safe, suburban feeling. I wished I had gone up to Paris with Bill, except that Paris
would have meant more fiesta-ing. I was through with fiestas for a while. It would be quiet in San Sebastian. The
season does not open there until August. I could get a good hotel room and read and swim. There was a fine beach
there. There were wonderful trees along the promenade above the beach, and there were many children sent down
with their nurses before the season opened. In the evening there would be band concerts under the trees across from
the Café Marinas. I could sit in the Marinas and listen.
"How does one eat inside?" I asked the waiter. Inside the café was a restaurant.
"Well. Very well. One eats very well."
"Good."
I went in and ate dinner. It was a big meal for France but it seemed very carefully apportioned after Spain. I
drank a bottle of wine for company. It was a Château Margaux. It was pleasant to be drinking slowly and to be
tasting the wine and to be drinking alone. A bottle of wine was good company. Afterward I had coffee. The waiter
recommended a Basque liqueur called Izzarra. He brought in the bottle and poured a liqueur-glass full. He said
http://www.en8848.com.cnIzzarra was made of the flowers of the Pyrenees. The veritable flowers of the Pyrenees. It looked like hair-oil and
smelled like Italian _strega_. I told him to take the flowers of the Pyrenees away and bring me a _vieux marc_. The
_marc_ was good. I had a second _marc_ after the coffee.
The waiter seemed a little offended about the flowers of the Pyrenees, so I overtipped him. That made him
happy. It felt comfortable to be in a country where it is so simple to make people happy. You can never tell whether
a Spanish waiter will thank you. Everything is on such a clear financial basis in France. It is the simplest country to
live in. No one makes things complicated by becoming your friend for any obscure reason. If you want people to
like you you have only to spend a little money. I spent a little money and the waiter liked me. He appreciated my
valuable qualities. He would be glad to see me back. I would dine there again some time and he would be glad to
see me, and would want me at his table. It would be a sincere liking because it would have a sound basis. I was back
in France.
Next morning I tipped every one a little too much at the hotel to make more friends, and left on the morning
train for San Sebastian. At the station I did not tip the porter more than I should because I did not think I would ever
see him again. I only wanted a few good French friends in Bayonne to make me welcome in case I should come
back there again. I knew that if they remembered me their friendship would be loyal.
At Irun we had to change trains and show passports. I hated to leave France. Life was so simple in France. I
felt I was a fool to be going back into Spain. In Spain you could not tell about anything. I felt like a fool to be going
back into it, but I stood in line with my passport, opened my bags for the customs, bought a ticket, went through a
gate, climbed onto the train, and after forty minutes and eight tunnels I was at San Sebastian.
Even on a hot day San Sebastian has a certain early-morning quality. The trees seem as though their leaves
were never quite dry. The streets feel as though they had just been sprinkled. It is always cool and shady on certain
streets on the hottest day. I went to a hotel in the town where I had stopped before, and they gave me a room with a
balcony that opened out above the roofs of the town. There was a green mountainside beyond the roofs.
I unpacked my bags and stacked my books on the table beside the head of the bed, put out my shaving things,
hung up some clothes in the big armoire, and made up a bundle for the laundry. Then I took a shower in the
bathroom and went down to lunch. Spain had not changed to summer-time, so I was early. I set my watch again. I
had recovered an hour by coming to San Sebastian.
As I went into the dining-room the concierge brought me a police bulletin to fill out. I signed it and asked him
for two telegraph forms, and wrote a message to the Hotel Montoya, telling them to forward all mail and telegrams
for me to this address. I calculated how many days I would be in San Sebastian and then wrote out a wire to the
office asking them to hold mail, but forward all wires for me to San Sebastian for six days. Then I went in and had
lunch.
After lunch I went up to my room, read a while, and went to sleep. When I woke it was half past four. I found
my swimming-suit, wrapped it with a comb in a towel, and went down-stairs and walked up the street to the Concha.
The tide was about half-way out. The beach was smooth and firm, and the sand yellow. I went into a bathing-cabin,
undressed, put on my suit, and walked across the smooth sand to the sea. The sand was warm under bare feet. There
were quite a few people in the water and on the beach. Out beyond where the headlands of the Concha almost met
to form the harbor there was a white line of breakers and the open sea. Although the tide was going out, there were a
few slow rollers. They came in like undulations in the water gathered weight of water, and then broke smoothly on
the warm sand. I waded out. The water was cold. As a roller came I dove, swam out under water, and came to the
surface with all the chill gone. I swam out to the raft, pulled myself up, and lay on the hot planks. A boy and girl
were at the other end. The girl had undone the top strap of her bathing-suit and was browning her back. The boy lay
face downward on the raft and talked to her. She laughed at things he said, and turned her brown back in the sun. I
lay on the raft in the sun until I was dry. Then I tried several dives. I dove deep once, swimming down to the bottom.
http://www.en8848.com.cnI swam with my eyes open and it was green and dark. The raft made a dark shadow. I came out of the water beside
the raft, pulled up, dove once more, holding it for length, and then swam ashore. I lay on the beach until I was dry,
then went into the bathing-cabin, took off my suit, sloshed myself with fresh water, and rubbed dry.
I walked around the harbor under the trees to the casino, and then up one of the cool streets to the Café
Marinas. There was an orchestra playing inside the café and I sat out on the terrace and enjoyed the fresh coolness
in the hot day, and had a glass of lemonjuice and shaved ice and then a long whiskey and soda. I sat in front of the
Marinas for a long time and read and watched the people, and listened to the music.
Later when it began to get dark, I walked around the harbor and out along the promenade, and finally back to
the hotel for supper. There was a bicycle-race on, the Tour du Pays Basque, and the riders were stopping that night
in San Sebastian. In the dining-room, at one side, there was a long table of bicycle-riders, eating with their trainers
and managers. They were all French and Belgians, and paid close attention to their meal, but they were having a
good time. At the head of the table were two good-looking French girls, with much Rue du Faubourg Montmartre
chic. I could not make out whom they belonged to. They all spoke in slang at the long table and there were many
private jokes and some jokes at the far end that were not repeated when the girls asked to hear them. The next
morning at five o'clock the race resumed with the last lap, San Sebastian-Bilbao. The bicycle-riders drank much
wine, and were burned and browned by the sun. They did not take the race seriously except among themselves.
They had raced among themselves so often that it did not make much difference who won. Especially in a foreign
country. The money could be arranged.
The man who had a matter of two minutes lead in the race had an attack of boils, which were very painful. He
sat on the small of his back. His neck was very red and the blond hairs were sunburned. The other riders joked him
about his boils. He tapped on the table with his fork.
"Listen," he said, "to-morrow my nose is so tight on the handlebars that the only thing touches those boils is a
lovely breeze."
One of the girls looked at him down the table, and he grinned and turned red. The Spaniards, they said, did not
know how to pedal.
I had coffee out on the terrasse with the team manager of one of the big bicycle manufacturers. He said it had
been a very pleasant race, and would have been worth watching if Bottechia had not abandoned it at Pamplona. The
dust had been bad, but in Spain the roads were better than in France. Bicycle road-racing was the only sport in the
world, he said. Had I ever followed the Tour de France? Only in the papers. The Tour de France was the greatest
sporting event in the world. Following and organizing the road races had made him know France. Few people know
France. All spring and all summer and all fall he spent on the road with bicycle road-racers. Look at the number of
motor-cars now that followed the riders from town to town in a road race. It was a rich country and more _sportif_
every year. It would be the most _sportif_ country in the world. It was bicycle road-racing did it. That and football.
He knew France. _La France Sportive_. He knew road-racing. We had a cognac. After all, though, it wasn't bad to
get back to Paris. There is only one Paname. In all the world, that is. Paris is the town the most _sportif_ in the
world. Did I know the _Chope de Negre?_ Did I not. I would see him there some time. I certainly would. We would
drink another _fine_ together. We certainly would. They started at six o'clock less a quarter in the morning. Would I
be up for the depart? I would certainly try to. Would I like him to call me? It was very interesting. I would leave a
call at the desk. He would not mind calling me. I could not let him take the trouble. I would leave a call at the desk.
We said good-bye until the next morning.
In the morning when I awoke the bicycle-riders and their following cars had been on the road for three hours.
I had coffee and the papers in bed and then dressed and took my bathing-suit down to the beach. Everything was
fresh and cool and damp in the early morning. Nurses in uniform and in peasant costume walked under the trees
with children. The Spanish children were beautiful. Some bootblacks sat together under a tree talking to a soldier.
http://www.en8848.com.cnThe soldier had only one arm. The tide was in and there was a good breeze and a surf on the beach.
I undressed in one of the bath-cabins, crossed the narrow line of beach and went into the water. I swam out,
trying to swim through the rollers, but having to dive sometimes. Then in the quiet water I turned and floated.
Floating I saw only the sky, and felt the drop and lift of the swells. I swam back to the surf and coasted in, face
down, on a big roller, then turned and swam, trying to keep in the trough and not have a wave break over me. It
made me tired, swimming in the trough, and I turned and swam out to the raft. The water was buoyant and cold. It
felt as though you could never sink. I swam slowly, it seemed like a long swim with the high tide, and then pulled
up on the raft and sat, dripping, on the boards that were becoming hot in the sun. I looked around at the bay, the old
town, the casino, the line of trees along the promenade, and the big hotels with their white porches and gold-lettered
names. Off on the right, almost closing the harbor, was a green hill with a castle. The raft rocked with the motion of
the water. On the other side of the narrow gap that led into the open sea was another high headland. I thought I
would like to swim across the bay but I was afraid of cramp.
I sat in the sun and watched the bathers on the beach. They looked very small. After a while I stood up,
gripped with my toes on the edge of the raft as it tipped with my weight, and dove cleanly and deeply, to come up
through the lightening water, blew the salt water out of my head, and swam slowly and steadily in to shore.
After I was dressed and had paid for the bath-cabin, I walked back to the hotel. The bicycle-racers had left
several copies of _L'Auto_ around, and I gathered them up in the reading-room and took them out and sat in an easy
chair in the sun toread about and catch up on French sporting life. While I was sitting there the concierge came out
with a blue envelope in his hand.
"A telegram for you, sir."
I poked my finger along under the fold that was fastened down, spread it open, and read it. It had been
forwarded from Paris:
COULD YOU COME HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
AM RATHER IN TROUBLE BRETT.
I tipped the concierge and read the message again. A postman was coming along the sidewalk. He turned into
the hotel. He had a big moustache and looked very military. He came out of the hotel again. The concierge was just
behind him.
"Here's another telegram for you, sir."
"Thank you," I said.
I opened it. It was forwarded from Pamplona.
COULD YOU COME HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
AM RATHER IN TROUBLE BRETT.
The concierge stood there waiting for another tip, probably.
"What time is there a train for Madrid?"
"It left at nine this morning. There is a slow train at eleven, and the Sud Express at ten to-night."
"Get me a berth on the Sud Express. Do you want the money now?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Just as you wish," he said. "I will have it put on the bill."
"Do that."
Well, that meant San Sebastian all shot to hell. I suppose, vaguely, I had expected something of the sort. I saw
the concierge standing in the doorway.
"Bring me a telegram form, please."
He brought it and I took out my fountain-pen and printed:
LADY ASHLEY HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
ARRIVING SUD EXPRESS TOMORROW
LOVE JAKE.
That seemed to handle it. That was it. Send a girl off with one man. Introduce her to another to go off with him.
Now go and bring her back. And sign the wire with love. That was it all right. I went in to lunch.
I did not sleep much that night on the Sud Express. In the morning I had breakfast in the dining-car and
watched the rock and pine country between Avila and Escorial. I saw the Escorial out of the window, gray and long
and cold in the sun, and did not give a damn about it. I saw Madrid come up over the plain, a compact white skyline
on the top of a little cliff away off across the sun-hardened country.
The Norte station in Madrid is the end of the line. All trains finish there. They don't go on anywhere. Outside
were cabs and taxis and a line of hotel runners. It was like a country town. I took a taxi and we climbed up through
the gardens, by the empty palace and the unfinished church on the edge of the cliff, and on up until we were in the
high, hot, modern town. The taxi coasted down a smooth street to the Puerta del Sol, and then through the traffic and
out into the Carrera San Jeronimo. All the shops had their awnings down against the heat. The windows on the
sunny side of the street were shuttered. The taxi stopped at the curb. I saw the sign HOTEL MONTANA on the
second floor. The taxi-driver carried the bags in and left them by the elevator. I could not make the elevator work, so
I walked up. On the second floor up was a cut brass sign: HOTEL MONTANA. I rang and no one came to the door.
I rang again and a maid with a sullen face opened the door.
"Is Lady Ashley here?" I asked.
She looked at me dully.
"Is an Englishwoman here?"
She turned and called some one inside. A very fat woman came to the door. Her hair was gray and stiffly oiled
in scallops around her face. She was short and commanding.
"Muy buenos," I said. "Is there an Englishwoman here? I would like to see this English lady."
"Muy buenos. Yes, there is a female English. Certainly you can see her if she wishes to see you."
"She wishes to see me."
"The chica will ask her."
"It is very hot."
"It is very hot in the summer in Madrid."
"And how cold in winter."
"Yes, it is very cold in winter."
Did I want to stay myself in person in the Hotel Montana?
Of that as yet I was undecided, but it would give me pleasure if my bags were brought up from the ground
floor in order that they might not be stolen. Nothing was ever stolen in the Hotel Montana. In other fondas, yes. Not
http://www.en8848.com.cnhere. No. The personages of this establishment were rigidly selectioned. I was happy to hear it. Nevertheless I
would welcome the upbringal of my bags.
The maid came in and said that the female English wanted to see the male English now, at once.
"Good," I said. "You see. It is as I said."
"Clearly."
I followed the maid's back down a long, dark corridor. At the end she knocked on a door.
"Hello," said Brett. "Is it you, jake?"
"It's me."
"Come in. Come in."
I opened the door. The maid closed it after me. Brett was in bed. She had just been brushing her hair and held
the brush in her hand. The room was in that disorder produced only by those who have always had servants.
"Darling!" Brett said.
I went over to the bed and put my arms around her. She kissed me, and while she kissed me I could feel she
was thinking of something else. She was trembling in my arms. She felt very small.
"Darling! I've had such a hell of a time."
"Tell me about it."
"Nothing to tell. He only left yesterday. I made him go."
"Why didn't you keep him?"
"I don't know. It isn't the sort of thing one does. I don't think I hurt him any."
"You were probably damn good for him."
"He shouldn't be living with any one. I realized that right away."
"No."
"Oh, hell!" she said, "let's not talk about it. Let's never talk about it."
"All right."
"It was rather a knock his being ashamed of me. He was ashamed of me for a while, you know."
"No."
"Oh, yes. They ragged him about me at the café, I guess. He wanted me to grow my hair out. Me, with long
hair. I'd look so like hell."
"It's funny."
"He said it would make me more womanly. I'd look a fright."
"What happened?"
"Oh, he got over that. He wasn't ashamed of me long."
"What was it about being in trouble?"
"I didn't know whether I could make him go, and I didn't have a sou to go away and leave him. He tried to
give me a lot of money, you know. I told him I had scads of it. He knew that was a lie. I couldn't take his money,
you know."
"No."
"Oh, let's not talk about it. There were some funny things, though. Do give me a cigarette."
I lit the cigarette.
"He learned his English as a waiter in Gib."
"Yes."
"He wanted to marry me, finally."
"Really?"
"Of course. I can't even marry Mike."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"Maybe he thought that would make him Lord Ashley."
"No. It wasn't that. He really wanted to marry me. So I couldn't go away from him, he said. He wanted to
make it sure I could never go away from him. After I'd gotten more womanly, of course."
"You ought to feel set up."
"I do. I'm all right again. He's wiped out that damned Cohn."
"Good."
"You know I'd have lived with him if I hadn't seen it was bad for him. We got along damned well."
"Outside of your personal appearance."
"Oh, he'd have gotten used to that."
She put out the cigarette.
"I'm thirty-four, you know. I'm not going to be one of these bitches that ruins children."
"No."
"I'm not going to be that way. I feel rather good, you know. I feel rather set up."
"Good."
She looked away. I thought she was looking for another cigarette. Then I saw she was crying. I could feel her
crying. Shaking and crying. She wouldn't look up. I put my arms around her.
"Don't let's ever talk about it. Please don't let's ever talk about it."
"Dear Brett."
"I'm going back to Mike." I could feel her crying as I held her close. "He's so damned nice and he's so awful.
He's my sort of thing."
She would not look up. I stroked her hair. I could feel her shaking.
"I won't be one of those bitches," she said. "But, oh, Jake, please let's never talk about it."
We left the Hotel Montana. The woman who ran the hotel would not let me pay the bill. The bill had been
paid.
"Oh, well. Let it go," Brett said. "It doesn't matter now."
We rode in a taxi down to the Palace Hotel, left the bags, arranged for berths on the Sud Express for the night,
and went into the bar of the hotel for a cocktail. We sat on high stools at the bar while the barman shook the
Martinis in a large nickelled shaker.
"It's funny what a wonderful gentility you get in the bar of a big hotel," I said.
"Barmen and jockeys are the only people who are polite any more."
"No matter how vulgar a hotel is, the bar is always nice."
"It's odd."
"Bartenders have always been fine."
"You know," Brett said, "it's quite true. He is only nineteen. Isn't it amazing?"
We touched the two glasses as they stood side by side on the bar. They were coldly beaded. Outside the
curtained window was the summer heat of Madrid.
"I like an olive in a Martini," I said to the barman.
"Right you are, sir. There you are."
"Thanks."
"I should have asked, you know."
The barman went far enough up the bar so that he would not hear our conversation. Brett had sipped from the
Martini as it stood, on the wood. Then she picked it up. Her hand was steady enough to lift it after that first sip.
"It's good. Isn't it a nice bar?"
"They're all nice bars."
http://www.en8848.com.cn"You know I didn't believe it at first. He was born in 1905. I was in school in Paris, then. Think of that."
"Anything you want me to think about it?"
"Don't be an ass. _Would_ you buy a lady a drink?"
"We'll have two more Martinis."
"As they were before, sir?"
"They were very good." Brett smiled at him.
"Thank you, ma'am."
"Well, bung-o," Brett said.
"Bung-o!"
"You know," Brett said, "he'd only been with two women before. He never cared about anything but
bull-fighting."
"He's got plenty of time."
"I don't know. He thinks it was me. Not the show in general."
"Well, it was you."
"Yes. It was me."
"I thought you weren't going to ever talk about it."
"How can I help it?"
"You'll lose it if you talk about it."
"I just talk around it. You know I feel rather damned good, Jake."
"You should."
"You know it makes one feel rather good deciding not to be a bitch."
"Yes."
"It's sort of what we have instead of God."
"Some people have God," I said. "Quite a lot."
"He never worked very well with me."
"Should we have another Martini?"
The barman shook up two more Martinis and poured them out into fresh glasses.
"Where will we have lunch?" I asked Brett. The bar was cool. You could feel the heat outside through the
window.
"Here?" asked Brett.
"It's rotten here in the hotel. Do you know a place called Botin's?" I asked the barman.
"Yes, sir. Would you like to have me write out the address?"
"Thank you."
We lunched up-stairs at Botin's. It is one of the best restaurants in the world. We had roast young suckling pig
and drank _rioja alta_. Brett did not eat much. She never ate much. I ate a very big meal and drank three bottles of
_rioja alta_.
"How do you feel, Jake?" Brett asked. "My God! what a meal you've eaten."
"I feel fine. Do you want a dessert?"
"Lord, no."
Brett was smoking.
"You like to eat, don't you?" she said.
"Yes," I said. "I like to do a lot of things."
"What do you like to do?"
"Oh," I said, "I like to do a lot of things. Don't you want a dessert?"
http://www.en8848.com.cn"You asked me that once," Brett said.
"Yes," I said. "So I did. Let's have another bottle of _rioja alta_."
"It's very good."
"You haven't drunk much of it," I said.
"I have. You haven't seen."
"Let's get two bottles," I said. The bottles came. I poured a little in my glass, then a glass for Brett, then filled
my glass. We touched glasses.
"Bung-o!" Brett said. I drank my glass and poured out another. Brett put her hand on my arm.
"Don't get drunk, Jake," she said. "You don't have to."
"How do you know?"
"Don't," she said. "You'll be all right."
"I'm not getting drunk," I said. "I'm just drinking a little wine. I like to drink wine."
"Don't get drunk," she said. "Jake, don't get drunk."
"Want to go for a ride?" I said. "Want to ride through the town?"
"Right," Brett said. "I haven't seen Madrid. I should see Madrid."
"I'll finish this," I said.
Down-stairs we came out through the first-floor dining-room to the street. A waiter went for a taxi. It was hot
and bright. Up the street was a little square with trees and grass where there were taxis parked. A taxi came up the
street, the waiter hanging out at the side. I tipped him and told the driver where to drive, and got in beside Brett. The
driver started up the street. I settled back. Brett moved close to me. We sat close against each other. I put my arm
around her and she rested against me comfortably. It was very hot and bright, and the houses looked sharply white.
We turned out onto the Gran Via.
"Oh, Jake," Brett said, "we could have had such a damned good time together."
Ahead was a mounted policeman in khaki directing traffic. He raised his baton. The car slowed suddenly
pressing Brett against me.
"Yes," I said. "Isn't it pretty to think so?"
THE END
http://www.en8848.com.cnABOUT THE AUTHOR
ERNEST HEMINGWAY was born in Oak Park, Illinois, in 1899, and began his writing career for The Kansas
City Star in 1917. During the First World War he volunteered as an ambulance driver on the Italian front but was
invalided home, having been seriously wounded while serving with the infantry. In 1921 Hemingway settled in
Paris, where he became part of the expatriate circle of Gertrude Stein, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ezra Pound, and Ford
Madox Ford. His first book, Three Stories and Ten Poems, was published in Paris in 1923 and was followed by the
short story selection In Our Time, which marked his American debut in 1925. With the appearance of The Sun Also
Rises in 1926, Hemingway became not only the voice of the "lost generation" but the preeminent writer of his time.
This was followed by Men Without Women in 1927, when Hemingway returned to the United States, and his novel
of the Italian front, A Farewell to Arms (1929). In the 1930s, Hemingway settled in Key West, and later in Cuba, but
he traveled widely--to Spain, Italy, and Africa--and wrote about his experiences in Death in the Afternoon (1932),
his classic treatise on bullfighting, and Green Hills of Africa (1935), an account of big-game hunting in Africa. Later
he reported on the Spanish Civil War, which became the background for his brilliant war novel, For Whom the Bell
Tolls (1939), hunted U-boats in the Caribbean, and covered the European front during the Second World War.
Hemingway's most popular work, The Old Man and the Sea, was awarded the Pulitzer Prize in 1953, and in 1954
Hemingway won the Nobel Prize in Literature "for his powerful, style-forming mastery of the art of narration." One
of the most important influences on the development of the short story and novel in American fiction, Hemingway
has seized the imagination of the American public like no other twentieth-century author. He died, by suicide, in
Ketchum, Idaho, in 1961. His other works include The Torrents of Spring (1926), Winner Take Nothing (1933), To
Have and Have No (1937), The Fifth Column and the First Forty-Nine Stories (1938), Across the River and Into the
Trees (1950), and posthumously, A Moveable Feast (1964), Islands in the Stream (1970), The Dangerous Summer
(1985), and The Garden of Eden (1986).
http://www.en8848.com.cn
